Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 28, 2019. Fiscal Year Highlights COVID-19 Update COVID-19 has spread rapidly throughout the world, prompting governments and businesses to take unprecedented measures in response. Such measures have included restrictions on travel and business operations, temporary closures of businesses, and quarantines and shelter-in-place orders. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly curtailed global economic activity and caused significant volatility and disruption in global financial markets. The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken by many countries in response have adversely affected and could in the future materially adversely impact the Company’s business, results of operations, financial condition and stock price. During 2020, aspects of the Company’s business were adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, with many of the Company’s retail stores, as well as channel partner points of sale, temporarily closed at various times, and the vast majority of the Company’s employees working remotely. The Company has reopened some of its offices and the majority of its retail stores, subject to operating restrictions to protect public health and the health and safety of employees and customers, and it continues to work on safely re-opening the remainder of its offices and retail stores, subject to local rules and regulations. The full extent of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance is currently uncertain and will depend on many factors outside the Company’s control, including, without limitation, the timing, extent, trajectory and duration of the pandemic, the development and availability of effective treatments and vaccines, the imposition of protective public safety measures, and the impact of the pandemic on the global economy and demand for consumer products. Refer to Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” for more information. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, along with commercial paper and other short-term liquidity arrangements, will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, dividends, share repurchases, debt repayments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations. Fiscal 2020 Highlights Total net sales increased 6% or $14.3 billion during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by higher net sales of Services and Wearables, Home and Accessories. The weakness in foreign currencies had an unfavorable impact on net sales during 2020. In April 2020, the Company announced an increase to its current share repurchase program authorization from $175 billion to $225 billion and raised its quarterly dividend from $0.1925 to $0.205 per share beginning in May 2020. During 2020, the Company repurchased $72.5 billion of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $14.1 billion. On August 28, 2020, the Company effected a four-for-one stock split to shareholders of record as of August 24, 2020. All share, RSU and per share or per RSU information has been retroactively adjusted to reflect the stock split. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 20 Products and Services Performance The following table shows net sales by category for 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in millions): (1)Products net sales include amortization of the deferred value of unspecified software upgrade rights, which are bundled in the sales price of the respective product. (2)Wearables, Home and Accessories net sales include sales of AirPods, Apple TV, Apple Watch, Beats products, HomePod, iPod touch and Apple-branded and third-party accessories. (3)Services net sales include sales from the Company’s advertising, AppleCare, digital content and other services. Services net sales also include amortization of the deferred value of Maps, Siri, and free iCloud® storage and Apple TV+ services, which are bundled in the sales price of certain products. iPhone iPhone net sales decreased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the absence of new iPhone models in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by the introduction of iPhone SE in the third quarter of 2020. Mac Mac net sales increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher net sales of MacBook Pro. iPad iPad net sales increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher net sales of 10-inch versions of iPad, iPad Air and iPad Pro. Wearables, Home and Accessories Wearables, Home and Accessories net sales increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher net sales of AirPods and Apple Watch. Services Services net sales increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher net sales from the App Store, advertising and cloud services. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 21 Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. Americas includes both North and South America. Europe includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. Greater China includes China mainland, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Rest of Asia Pacific includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable segments. Although the reportable segments provide similar hardware and software products and similar services, each one is managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further information regarding the Company’s reportable segments can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” The following table shows net sales by reportable segment for 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in millions): Americas Americas net sales increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher net sales of Services and Wearables, Home and Accessories. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Americas net sales during 2020. Europe Europe net sales increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone, Wearables, Home and Accessories and Services. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Europe net sales during 2020. Greater China Greater China net sales decreased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to lower net sales of iPhone, partially offset by higher net sales of Services and iPad. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Greater China net sales during 2020. Japan Japan net sales were flat during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to lower net sales of iPhone, offset by higher net sales of Services and Wearables, Home and Accessories. The strength of the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Japan net sales during 2020. Rest of Asia Pacific Rest of Asia Pacific net sales increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher net sales of Wearables, Home and Accessories, Services and iPhone. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2020. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 22 Gross Margin Products and Services gross margin and gross margin percentage for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (dollars in millions): Products Gross Margin Products gross margin increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher Products volume and material cost savings, partially offset by the weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a different Products mix. Products gross margin percentage decreased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a different Products mix, partially offset by material cost savings and higher leverage. Services Gross Margin Services gross margin increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher Services net sales and a different Services mix. Services gross margin percentage increased during 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to a different Services mix and higher leverage, partially offset by higher Services costs. The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by a variety of factors, as set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors.” As a result, the Company believes, in general, gross margins will be subject to volatility and remain under downward pressure. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (dollars in millions): Research and Development The year-over-year growth in R&D expense in 2020 was driven primarily by increases in headcount-related expenses. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace, and to the development of new and updated products and services that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. Selling, General and Administrative The year-over-year growth in selling, general and administrative expense in 2020 was driven primarily by increases in headcount-related expenses, higher spending on marketing and advertising, and higher variable selling expenses. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 23 Other Income/(Expense), Net Other income/(expense), net (“OI&E”) for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was as follows (dollars in millions): The year-over-year decrease in OI&E during 2020 was due primarily to lower interest income and net impairment/gain activity on non-marketable securities, partially offset by lower interest expense. The weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.85% and 2.19% in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes, effective tax rate and statutory federal income tax rate for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were as follows (dollars in millions): The Company’s effective tax rate for both 2020 and 2019 was lower than the statutory federal income tax rate due primarily to the lower tax rate on foreign earnings, including the impact of tax settlements, and tax benefits from share-based compensation. The Company’s effective tax rate for 2020 was lower compared to 2019 due primarily to a one-time adjustment of U.S. foreign tax credits in response to regulations issued by the U.S. Department of the Treasury in December 2019 in connection with the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Act”) and higher tax benefits from share-based compensation. As of September 26, 2020, the Company had net deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences and tax credits of $11.0 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $2.8 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to recover the net deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the amount of the valuation allowance, if any, by assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Financial Instruments In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which modifies the measurement of expected credit losses on certain financial instruments. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-13 in its first quarter of 2021 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Based on the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio, current market conditions, and historical credit loss activity, the adoption of ASU 2016-13 will not have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 24 Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 26, 2020, September 28, 2019 and September 29, 2018 (in millions): (1)As of September 26, 2020 and September 28, 2019, total marketable securities included $18.6 billion and $18.9 billion, respectively, that was restricted from general use, related to the State Aid Decision (refer to Note 5, “Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) and other agreements. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, along with commercial paper and other short-term liquidity arrangements, will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, dividends, share repurchases, debt repayments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. In connection with the State Aid Decision, as of September 26, 2020, the adjusted recovery amount of €12.9 billion plus interest of €1.2 billion was funded into escrow, where it will remain restricted from general use pending the conclusion of all legal proceedings. Further information regarding the State Aid Decision can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 5, “Income Taxes.” The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is primarily invested in highly rated securities, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. The Company’s investment policy generally requires securities to be investment grade and limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. During 2020, cash generated by operating activities of $80.7 billion was a result of $57.4 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $17.6 billion and an increase in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $5.7 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $4.3 billion during 2020 consisted primarily of cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $7.3 billion and cash paid for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $1.5 billion, partially offset by proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities, net of purchases, of $5.5 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $86.8 billion during 2020 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $72.4 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $14.1 billion, cash used to repay or redeem term debt of $12.6 billion and net repayments of commercial paper of $1.0 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt of $16.1 billion. During 2019, cash generated by operating activities of $69.4 billion was a result of $55.3 billion of net income and non-cash adjustments to net income of $17.6 billion, partially offset by a decrease in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $3.5 billion. Cash generated by investing activities of $45.9 billion during 2019 consisted primarily of proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities, net of purchases, of $57.5 billion, partially offset by cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $10.5 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $91.0 billion during 2019 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $66.9 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $14.1 billion, cash used to repay term debt of $8.8 billion and net repayments of commercial paper of $6.0 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt of $7.0 billion. Debt The Company issues unsecured short-term promissory notes (“Commercial Paper”) pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company uses the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September 26, 2020, the Company had $5.0 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.62% and maturities generally less than nine months. The Company may enter into agreements to sell certain of its marketable securities with a promise to repurchase the securities at a specified time and amount as an additional short-term liquidity arrangement. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 25 As of September 26, 2020, the Company had outstanding floating- and fixed-rate notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $106.1 billion (collectively the “Notes”). During 2020, the Company issued $16.1 billion and repaid or redeemed $12.6 billion of Notes. The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. In addition, the Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into foreign currency swaps to manage foreign currency risk on the Notes. Further information regarding the Company’s debt issuances and related hedging activity can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 3, “Financial Instruments” and Note 6, “Debt.” Capital Return Program As of September 26, 2020, the Company was authorized to purchase up to $225 billion of the Company’s common stock under a share repurchase program, of which $168.6 billion had been utilized. During 2020, the Company repurchased 917 million shares of its common stock for $72.5 billion, including 141 million shares delivered under a $10.0 billion November 2019 ASR and 64 million shares delivered under a $6.0 billion May 2020 ASR. The Company’s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under this program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated and/or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. As of September 26, 2020, the Company’s quarterly cash dividend was $0.205 per share. The Company intends to increase its dividend on an annual basis, subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. Contractual Obligations The following table presents certain payments due by the Company as of September 26, 2020, and includes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for manufacturing purchase obligations, other purchase obligations and certain lease obligations (in millions): (1)Represents amount expected to be paid under manufacturing-related supplier arrangements, which are primarily noncancelable. Leases The Company has lease arrangements for certain equipment and facilities, including retail, corporate, manufacturing and data center space. The Company’s retail store and other facility leases typically have original terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi-year renewal options. The above contractual obligations table includes future payments under leases that had commenced as of September 26, 2020, and were therefore recorded on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet, as well as leases that had been signed but not yet commenced as of September 26, 2020. Further information regarding the Company’s leases can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 12, “Leases.” Manufacturing Purchase Obligations The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Other Purchase Obligations The Company’s other purchase obligations consist of noncancelable obligations to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and noncancelable obligations related to advertising, licensing, R&D, Internet and telecommunications services, content creation and other activities. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 26 Deemed Repatriation Tax Payable As of September 26, 2020, a significant portion of the other non-current liabilities in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet consisted of the deemed repatriation tax payable imposed by the Act. The Company plans to pay the deemed repatriation tax payable in installments in accordance with the Act. Other Non-Current Liabilities The Company’s remaining other non-current liabilities primarily consist of items for which the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing or amount of payments; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligations table. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimation of inventory purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition The Company has identified up to three performance obligations regularly included in arrangements involving the sale of iPhone, Mac, iPad and certain other products. The first performance obligation, which represents the substantial portion of the allocated sales price, is the hardware and bundled software delivered at the time of sale. The second performance obligation is the right to receive certain product-related bundled services, which include iCloud, Siri and Maps. The third performance obligation is the right to receive, on a when-and-if-available basis, future unspecified software upgrades relating to the software bundled with each device. The Company allocates revenue and any related discounts to these performance obligations based on their relative stand-alone selling prices (“SSPs”). Because the Company lacks observable prices for the undelivered performance obligations, the allocation of revenue is based on the Company’s estimated SSPs. Revenue allocated to the product-related bundled services and unspecified software upgrade rights is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period they are expected to be provided. The Company’s process for determining estimated SSPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s SSPs and the future rate of related amortization for product-related bundled services and unspecified software upgrade rights related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the nature of the product-related bundled services and unspecified software upgrade rights offered, their estimated value and the estimated period they are expected to be provided. Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimation of Inventory Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company invests in manufacturing-related assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities and prepayments provided to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term agreements to secure the supply of inventory. The Company also accrues estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees related to inventory orders that have been canceled or are expected to be canceled. The Company’s estimates of future product development plans and demand for its products are key inputs in determining the recoverability of manufacturing-related assets and assessing the adequacy of any purchase commitment cancellation fee accruals. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in estimated demand for one or more of the Company’s products, a change in the Company’s product development plans, or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record write-downs or impairments of manufacturing-related assets or accrue purchase commitment cancellation fees. Apple Inc. | 2020 Form 10-K | 27 Warranty Costs The Company offers limited warranties on its new and certified refurbished hardware products and on parts used to repair its hardware products, and customers may purchase extended service coverage, where available, on many of the Company’s hardware products. The Company accrues the estimated cost of warranties in the period the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost per claim and knowledge of specific product failures outside the Company’s typical experience. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required. Income Taxes The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater-than-50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable, the determination of which requires significant judgment. Except as described in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies” under the heading “Contingencies,” in the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss greater than a recorded accrual, concerning loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. The outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. If one or more legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts above management’s expectations, the Company’s financial condition and operating results for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Unless otherwise stated, all information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar, and references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2019 and 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018. Discussions of 2017 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2018 and 2017 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 29, 2018. Fiscal Period The Company’s fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company’s fiscal years 2019 and 2018 spanned 52 weeks each, whereas fiscal year 2017 included 53 weeks. A 14th week was included in the first quarter of 2017, as is done every five or six years, to realign the Company’s fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. Fiscal 2019 Highlights Total net sales decreased 2% or $5.4 billion during 2019 compared to 2018, driven by lower net sales of iPhone, partially offset by higher net sales of Wearables, Home and Accessories and Services in all geographic operating segments. The weakness in foreign currencies had a significant unfavorable impact on net sales during 2019. In April 2019, the Company announced an increase to its current share repurchase program authorization from $100 billion to $175 billion and raised its quarterly dividend from $0.73 to $0.77 per share beginning in May 2019. During 2019, the Company repurchased $67.1 billion of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $14.1 billion. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 18 Products and Services Performance Beginning in the first quarter of 2019, the Company classified the amortization of the deferred value of Maps, Siri and free iCloud services, which are bundled in the sales price of iPhone, Mac, iPad and certain other products, in Services net sales. Historically, the Company classified the amortization of these amounts in Products net sales consistent with its management reporting framework. As a result, Products and Services net sales for 2018 and 2017 were reclassified to conform to the 2019 presentation. The following table shows net sales by category for 2019, 2018 and 2017 (dollars in millions): (1) Products net sales include amortization of the deferred value of unspecified software upgrade rights, which are bundled in the sales price of the respective product. (2) Wearables, Home and Accessories net sales include sales of AirPods, Apple TV, Apple Watch, Beats products, HomePod, iPod touch and Apple-branded and third-party accessories. (3) Services net sales include sales from the Company’s digital content stores and streaming services, AppleCare, licensing and other services. Services net sales also include amortization of the deferred value of Maps, Siri and free iCloud services, which are bundled in the sales price of certain products. iPhone iPhone net sales decreased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to lower iPhone unit sales. Mac Mac net sales increased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to higher net sales of MacBook Air, partially offset by lower net sales of MacBook® and MacBook Pro®. iPad iPad net sales increased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to higher net sales of iPad Pro. Wearables, Home and Accessories Wearables, Home and Accessories net sales increased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to higher net sales of AirPods and Apple Watch. Services Services net sales increased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to higher net sales from the App Store, licensing and AppleCare. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 19 Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. Americas includes both North and South America. Europe includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. Greater China includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Rest of Asia Pacific includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable segments. Although the reportable segments provide similar hardware and software products and similar services, each one is managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further information regarding the Company’s reportable segments can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” The following table shows net sales by reportable segment for 2019, 2018 and 2017 (dollars in millions): Americas Americas net sales increased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to higher Services and Wearables, Home and Accessories net sales, partially offset by lower iPhone net sales. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Americas net sales during 2019. Europe Europe net sales decreased during 2019 compared to 2018 due to lower iPhone net sales, partially offset by higher Wearables, Home and Accessories and Services net sales. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a significant unfavorable impact on Europe net sales during 2019. Greater China Greater China net sales decreased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to lower iPhone net sales, partially offset by higher Wearables, Home and Accessories and Services net sales. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Greater China net sales during 2019. Japan Japan net sales decreased during 2019 compared to 2018 due to lower iPhone net sales, partially offset by higher Services and Wearables, Home and Accessories net sales. The value of the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Japan net sales during 2019. Rest of Asia Pacific Rest of Asia Pacific net sales increased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to higher Wearables, Home and Accessories and Services net sales, partially offset by lower iPhone net sales. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a significant unfavorable impact on Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2019. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 20 Gross Margin Products and Services gross margin and gross margin percentage for 2019, 2018 and 2017 were as follows (dollars in millions): Products Gross Margin Products gross margin and Products gross margin percentage decreased during 2019 compared to 2018 due primarily to lower iPhone unit sales and the weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Products gross margin increased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to a favorable shift in mix of iPhones and the strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by higher product cost structures. Year-over-year Products gross margin percentage decreased during 2018 due primarily to higher product cost structures, partially offset by the strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Services Gross Margin Year-over-year Services gross margin increased during 2019 and 2018 due primarily to higher Services net sales and a different services mix. Year-over-year Services gross margin percentage increased during 2019 and 2018 due primarily to a different services mix and leverage of the Company’s services fixed cost structure from higher Services net sales. The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by a variety of factors, as set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors”. As a result, the Company believes, in general, gross margins will be subject to volatility and remain under downward pressure. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2019, 2018 and 2017 were as follows (dollars in millions): Research and Development The year-over-year growth in R&D expense in 2019 was driven primarily by increases in headcount-related expenses. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace, and to the development of new and updated products and services that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. Selling, General and Administrative The year-over-year growth in selling, general and administrative expense in 2019 was driven primarily by increases in headcount-related expenses and higher spending on marketing and advertising and infrastructure-related costs. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 21 Other Income/(Expense), Net Other income/(expense), net (“OI&E”) for 2019, 2018 and 2017 was as follows (dollars in millions): The year-over-year decrease in OI&E during 2019 was due primarily to lower interest income and higher interest expense, partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange-related items. The weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 2.19% and 2.16% in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes, effective tax rate and statutory federal income tax rate for 2019, 2018 and 2017 were as follows (dollars in millions): On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act”), which significantly changed U.S. tax law. The Act lowered the Company’s U.S. statutory federal income tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, while also imposing a deemed repatriation tax on previously deferred foreign income. By operation of law, the Company applied a blended U.S. statutory federal income tax rate of 24.5% for 2018 (the “2018 blended U.S. tax rate”). The Act also created a new minimum tax on certain foreign earnings. The Company’s effective tax rate for 2019 was lower than the statutory federal income tax rate due primarily to the lower tax rate on foreign earnings and tax benefits from share-based compensation. The Company’s effective tax rate for 2018 was lower than the 2018 blended U.S. tax rate due primarily to the lower tax rate on foreign earnings, partially offset by the remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities as a result of the Act. The Company’s effective tax rate for 2019 was lower compared to 2018 due primarily to a lower statutory federal income tax rate in 2019 and the impact of the Act in 2018, partially offset by higher taxes on foreign earnings in 2019. As of September 28, 2019, the Company had net deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences and tax credits of $14.3 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $6.2 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to recover the net deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the amount of the valuation allowance, if any, by assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Hedging In August 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2017-12, Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities (“ASU 2017-12”). ASU 2017-12 expands component and fair value hedging, specifies the presentation of the effects of hedging instruments, and eliminates the separate measurement and presentation of hedge ineffectiveness. The Company will adopt ASU 2017-12 in its first quarter of 2020 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Based on the Company’s derivative portfolio and hedging strategies, the adoption of ASU 2017-12 is not expected to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. Financial Instruments In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which modifies the measurement of expected credit losses on certain financial instruments. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-13 in its first quarter of 2021 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Based on the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio, current market conditions, and historical credit loss activity, the adoption of ASU 2016-13 is not expected to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 22 Leases In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which modifies lease accounting for lessees to increase transparency and comparability by recording lease assets and liabilities for operating leases and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-02 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method through a cumulative-effect adjustment at the beginning of its first quarter of 2020. Upon adoption, the Company anticipates recording lease-related assets and liabilities of approximately $8 billion on its Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheet, with no material impact to its Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 28, 2019, September 29, 2018 and September 30, 2017 (in millions): (1) As of September 28, 2019 and September 29, 2018, total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities included $18.9 billion and $20.3 billion, respectively, that was restricted from general use, related to the State Aid Decision (refer to Note 5, “Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) and other agreements. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, along with commercial paper and other short-term liquidity arrangements, will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, dividends, share repurchases, debt repayments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. In connection with the State Aid Decision, as of September 28, 2019, the entire adjusted recovery amount of €12.9 billion plus interest of €1.2 billion was funded into escrow, where it will remain restricted from general use pending the conclusion of all appeals. Further information regarding the State Aid Decision can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 5, “Income Taxes.” The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is primarily invested in highly rated securities, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. The Company’s investment policy generally requires securities to be investment grade and limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. During 2019, cash generated by operating activities of $69.4 billion was a result of $55.3 billion of net income and non-cash adjustments to net income of $17.6 billion, partially offset by a decrease in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $3.5 billion. Cash generated by investing activities of $45.9 billion during 2019 consisted primarily of proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities, net of purchases, of $57.5 billion, partially offset by cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $10.5 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $91.0 billion during 2019 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $66.9 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $14.1 billion, cash used to repay term debt of $8.8 billion and net repayments of commercial paper of $6.0 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt of $7.0 billion. During 2018, cash generated by operating activities of $77.4 billion was a result of $59.5 billion of net income and an increase in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $34.7 billion, partially offset by non-cash adjustments to net income of $16.8 billion. Cash generated by investing activities of $16.1 billion during 2018 consisted primarily of proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities, net of purchases, of $32.4 billion, partially offset by cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $13.3 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $87.9 billion during 2018 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $72.7 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $13.7 billion and cash used to repay term debt of $6.5 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt of $7.0 billion. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 23 Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $7.6 billion during 2019, which included product tooling and manufacturing process equipment; data centers; corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements; and retail store facilities. Debt The Company issues unsecured short-term promissory notes (“Commercial Paper”) pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company uses the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September 28, 2019, the Company had $6.0 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 2.24% and maturities generally less than nine months. As of September 28, 2019, the Company had outstanding floating- and fixed-rate notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $101.7 billion (collectively the “Notes”). During 2019, the Company issued $7.0 billion and repaid $8.8 billion of Notes. The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. In addition, the Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into foreign currency swaps to manage foreign currency risk on the Notes. Further information regarding the Company’s debt issuances and related hedging activity can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 3, “Financial Instruments” and Note 6, “Debt.” Capital Return Program On April 30, 2019, the Company announced the Board of Directors increased the current share repurchase program authorization from $100 billion to $175 billion of the Company’s common stock, of which $96.1 billion had been utilized as of September 28, 2019. During 2019, the Company repurchased 345.2 million shares of its common stock for $67.1 billion, including 62.0 million shares delivered under a $12.0 billion ASR dated February 2019, which settled in August 2019. The Company’s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under this program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated and/or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. On April 30, 2019, the Company also announced the Board of Directors raised the Company’s quarterly cash dividend from $0.73 to $0.77 per share, beginning with the dividend paid during the third quarter of 2019. The Company intends to increase its dividend on an annual basis, subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. Contractual Obligations The following table presents certain payments due by the Company as of September 28, 2019, and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for term debt and the deemed repatriation tax payable (in millions): (1) Represents amount expected to be paid under manufacturing-related supplier arrangements, which are primarily noncancelable. Operating Leases The Company’s retail store and other facility leases typically have original terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi-year renewal options. Manufacturing Purchase Obligations The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 24 Other Purchase Obligations The Company’s other purchase obligations consist of noncancelable obligations to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and noncancelable obligations related to advertising, licensing, R&D, Internet and telecommunications services, content creation and other activities. Deemed Repatriation Tax Payable As of September 28, 2019, a significant portion of the other non-current liabilities in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet consisted of the deemed repatriation tax payable imposed by the Act. The Company plans to pay the deemed repatriation tax payable in installments in accordance with the Act. Other Non-Current Liabilities The Company’s remaining other non-current liabilities primarily consist of items for which the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing or amount of payments; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimation of inventory purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition The Company has identified up to three performance obligations regularly included in arrangements involving the sale of iPhone, Mac, iPad and certain other products. The first performance obligation, which represents the substantial portion of the allocated sales price, is the hardware and bundled software delivered at the time of sale. The second performance obligation is the right to receive certain product-related bundled services, which include iCloud, Siri and Maps. The third performance obligation is the right to receive, on a when-and-if-available basis, future unspecified software upgrades relating to the software bundled with each device. The Company allocates revenue and any related discounts to these performance obligations based on their relative stand-alone selling prices (“SSPs”). Because the Company lacks observable prices for the undelivered performance obligations, the allocation of revenue is based on the Company’s estimated SSPs. Revenue allocated to the product-related bundled services and unspecified software upgrade rights is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period they are expected to be provided. The Company’s process for determining estimated SSPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s SSPs and the future rate of related amortization for product-related bundled services and unspecified software upgrade rights related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the nature of the product-related bundled services and unspecified software upgrade rights offered, their estimated value and the estimated period they are expected to be provided. Apple Inc. | 2019 Form 10-K | 25 Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimation of Inventory Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company invests in manufacturing-related assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities and prepayments provided to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term agreements to secure the supply of inventory. The Company also accrues estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees related to inventory orders that have been canceled or are expected to be canceled. The Company’s estimates of future product development plans and demand for its products are the key inputs in the determination of the recoverability of manufacturing-related assets and the assessment of the adequacy of any purchase commitment cancellation fee accruals. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in estimated demand for one or more of the Company’s products, a change in the Company’s product development plans, or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record write-downs or impairments of manufacturing-related assets or accrue purchase commitment cancellation fees. Warranty Costs The Company offers limited warranties on its new hardware products and on parts used to repair its hardware products, and customers may purchase extended service coverage, where available, on many of the Company’s hardware products. The Company accrues the estimated cost of warranties in the period the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost per claim and knowledge of specific product failures outside the Company’s typical experience. The Company regularly reviews these estimates and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required. Income Taxes The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater-than-50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable, the determination of which requires significant judgment. Except as described in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies” under the heading “Contingencies,” in the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss greater than a recorded accrual, concerning loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. The outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. If one or more legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts above management’s expectations, the Company’s financial condition and operating results for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Overview and Highlights The Company designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices and personal computers, and sells a variety of related software, services, accessories and third-party digital content and applications. The Company’s products and services include iPhone, iPad, Mac, Apple Watch, AirPods, Apple TV, HomePod, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, iOS, macOS, watchOS and tvOS operating systems, iCloud, Apple Pay and a variety of other accessory, service and support offerings. The Company sells and delivers digital content and applications through the iTunes Store, App Store, Mac App Store, TV App Store, Book Store and Apple Music (collectively “Digital Content and Services”). The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Apple-compatible products, including application software and various accessories, through its retail and online stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers. Fiscal Period The Company’s fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company’s fiscal years 2018 and 2016 spanned 52 weeks each, whereas fiscal year 2017 included 53 weeks. A 14th week was included in the first quarter of 2017, as is done every five or six years, to realign the Company’s fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. Fiscal 2018 Highlights Net sales increased 16% or $36.4 billion during 2018 compared to 2017, driven by higher net sales of iPhone, Services and Other Products. Net sales increased year-over-year in each of the geographic reportable segments. In May 2018, the Company announced a new capital return program of $100 billion and raised its quarterly dividend from $0.63 to $0.73 per share beginning in May 2018. During 2018, the Company spent $73.1 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $13.7 billion. Fiscal 2017 Highlights Net sales increased 6% or $13.6 billion during 2017 compared to 2016, primarily driven by growth in Services, iPhone and Mac. The year-over-year increase in net sales reflected growth in each of the geographic reportable segments, with the exception of Greater China. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on net sales during 2017. In May 2017, the Company announced an increase to its capital return program by raising the total size of the program from $250 billion to $300 billion. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization from $175 billion to $210 billion and raising its quarterly dividend from $0.57 to $0.63 per share beginning in May 2017. During 2017, the Company spent $33.0 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.8 billion. The $210 billion share repurchase program was completed in the third quarter of 2018. The Company issued $24.0 billion of U.S. dollar-denominated term debt, €2.5 billion of euro-denominated term debt and C$2.5 billion of Canadian dollar-denominated term debt during 2017. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 22 Sales Data The following table shows net sales by reportable segment and net sales and unit sales by product for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): (1) Includes deferrals and amortization of related software upgrade rights and non-software services. (2) Includes revenue from Digital Content and Services, AppleCare, Apple Pay, licensing and other services. Services net sales in 2018 included a favorable one-time item of $236 million in connection with the final resolution of various lawsuits. Services net sales in 2017 included a favorable one-time adjustment of $640 million due to a change in estimate based on the availability of additional supporting information. (3) Includes sales of AirPods, Apple TV, Apple Watch, Beats products, HomePod, iPod touch and other Apple-branded and third-party accessories. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 23 Product Performance iPhone The following table presents iPhone net sales and unit sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): iPhone net sales increased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to a different mix of iPhones resulting in higher average selling prices. iPhone net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due to higher iPhone unit sales and a different mix of iPhones with higher average selling prices. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on iPhone net sales during 2017. iPad The following table presents iPad net sales and unit sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): iPad net sales decreased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to a different mix of iPads resulting in lower average selling prices. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on iPad net sales during 2018. iPad net sales decreased during 2017 compared to 2016 due to lower iPad unit sales and a different mix of iPads with lower average selling prices. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on iPad net sales during 2017. Mac The following table presents Mac net sales and unit sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): Mac net sales decreased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to lower Mac unit sales, partially offset by a different mix of Macs with higher average selling prices. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Mac net sales during 2018. Mac net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to a different mix of Macs with higher average selling prices and higher Mac unit sales. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Mac net sales during 2017. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 24 Services The following table presents Services net sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year growth in Services net sales in 2018 was due primarily to licensing, App Store and AppleCare. During 2018, the Company recognized a favorable one-time item of $236 million in connection with the final resolution of various lawsuits. The year-over-year growth in Services net sales in 2017 was due primarily to increases in App Store and licensing sales. Services net sales in 2017 included a favorable one-time adjustment of $640 million due to a change in estimate based on the availability of additional supporting information. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. Americas includes both North and South America. Europe includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. Greater China includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Rest of Asia Pacific includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable segments. Although the reportable segments provide similar hardware and software products and similar services, each one is managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further information regarding the Company’s reportable segments can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Americas The following table presents Americas net sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions): Americas net sales increased during 2018 compared to 2017 due to higher net sales of iPhone, Services and Other Products. Americas net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone, Services and Mac. Europe The following table presents Europe net sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions): Europe net sales increased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone and Services. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Europe net sales during 2018. Europe net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone and Services. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Europe net sales during 2017. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 25 Greater China The following table presents Greater China net sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions): Greater China net sales increased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone and Services. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Greater China net sales during 2018. Greater China net sales decreased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to lower net sales of iPhone, partially offset by higher net sales of Services. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Greater China net sales during 2017. Japan The following table presents Japan net sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions): Japan net sales increased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone and Services. The year-over-year increase in Japan net sales in 2017 was due to higher net sales of Services and the strength in the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Rest of Asia Pacific The following table presents Rest of Asia Pacific net sales information for 2018, 2017 and 2016 (dollars in millions): Rest of Asia Pacific net sales increased during 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone and Services. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2018. Rest of Asia Pacific net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone, Services and Mac. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2017. Gross Margin Gross margin for 2018, 2017 and 2016 was as follows (dollars in millions): Gross margin increased in 2018 compared to 2017 due primarily to a favorable shift in mix of iPhones with higher average selling prices and higher Services net sales, partially offset by higher product cost structures. Gross margin percentage decreased year-over-year due primarily to higher product cost structures, partially offset by higher Services net sales. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on gross margin and gross margin percentage during 2018. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 26 Gross margin increased in 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to a shift in mix to Services and an overall increase in product volumes. Gross margin percentage decreased year-over-year due primarily to higher product costs, partially offset by a favorable shift in mix to Services. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on gross margin and gross margin percentage during 2017. The Company anticipates gross margin percentage during the first quarter of 2019 to be between 38.0% and 38.5%. The foregoing statement regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage in the first quarter of 2019 is forward-looking and could differ from actual results. The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by multiple factors including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors” and those described in this paragraph. In general, the Company believes gross margins will be subject to volatility and remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including: continued industry-wide global product pricing pressures and product pricing actions that the Company may take in response to such pressures; increased competition; the Company’s ability to effectively stimulate demand for certain of its products; compressed product life cycles; potential increases in the cost of components and outside manufacturing services; the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively; shifts in the mix of products and services, or in the geographic, currency or channel mix; fluctuations in exchange rates; and costs associated with the Company’s frequent introductions and transitions of products and services. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2018, 2017 and 2016 were as follows (dollars in millions): Research and Development The year-over-year growth in R&D expense in 2018 was driven primarily by increases in headcount-related expenses, infrastructure-related costs and material costs to support expanded R&D activities. R&D expense increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to increases in headcount-related expenses and material costs to support expanded R&D activities. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace, and to the development of new and updated products and services that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. Selling, General and Administrative The year-over-year growth in selling, general and administrative expense in 2018 was driven primarily by increases in in headcount-related expenses, professional services and infrastructure-related costs. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense in 2017 compared to 2016 was driven primarily by an increase in headcount-related expenses, variable selling expenses and infrastructure-related costs. Other Income/(Expense), Net Other income/(expense), net for 2018, 2017 and 2016 was as follows (dollars in millions): The year-over-year decrease in other income/(expense), net during 2018 was due primarily to higher interest expense on debt and the impact of foreign exchange-related items, partially offset by higher interest income. The year-over-year increase in other income/(expense), net during 2017 was due primarily to higher interest income and the favorable impact of foreign exchange-related items, partially offset by higher interest expense on debt. The weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 2.16%, 1.99% and 1.73% in 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 27 Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2018, 2017 and 2016 were as follows (dollars in millions): On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act”), which significantly changed U.S. tax law. The Act lowered the Company’s U.S. statutory federal income tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, while also imposing a deemed repatriation tax on previously deferred foreign income. By operation of law, the Company applied a blended U.S. statutory federal income tax rate of 24.5% for 2018 (the “2018 blended U.S. tax rate”). The Act also created a new minimum tax on certain future foreign earnings. The Company’s effective tax rate for 2018 was lower than the 2018 blended U.S. tax rate due primarily to the lower tax rate on foreign earnings, partially offset by the remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities as a result of the Act. The Company’s effective tax rates for 2017 and 2016 were lower than the historical statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings, a substantial portion of which was generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, for which no U.S. taxes were provided when such earnings were intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. The lower effective tax rate in 2018 compared to 2017 was due primarily to the lower 2018 blended U.S. tax rate, partially offset by the remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities as a result of the Act. The lower effective tax rate in 2017 compared to 2016 was due to a different geographic mix of earnings and higher U.S. R&D tax credits. As a result of adopting Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-09, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2016-09”), in 2018, the Company records any excess tax benefits or deficiencies from its equity awards as part of the provision for income taxes. The Company anticipates that these excess tax benefits or deficiencies will have the greatest impact on its effective tax rates in the first and third quarters, as the majority of the Company’s equity awards vest in those quarters. As of September 29, 2018, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses and tax credits of $6.3 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $426 million. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and the amount of a valuation allowance. On August 30, 2016, the European Commission announced its decision that Ireland granted state aid to the Company by providing tax opinions in 1991 and 2007 concerning the tax allocation of profits of the Irish branches of two subsidiaries of the Company (the “State Aid Decision”). The State Aid Decision ordered Ireland to calculate and recover additional taxes from the Company for the period June 2003 through December 2014. The recovery amount was calculated to be €13.1 billion, plus interest of €1.2 billion. Irish legislative changes, effective as of January 2015, eliminated the application of the tax opinions from that date forward. The Company believes the State Aid Decision to be without merit and appealed to the General Court of the Court of Justice of the European Union. Ireland has also appealed the State Aid Decision. The Company believes that any incremental Irish corporate income taxes potentially due related to the State Aid Decision would be creditable against U.S. taxes, subject to any foreign tax credit limitations in the Act. As of September 29, 2018, the entire recovery amount plus interest was funded into escrow, where it will remain restricted from general use pending conclusion of all appeals. On July 24, 2018, the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the U.S. Tax Court's decision in Altera Corp v. Commissioner, regarding the inclusion of share-based compensation in cost-sharing arrangements with foreign subsidiaries. The reversal was subsequently withdrawn, and the Company believes adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from the final resolution of the case. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Hedging In August 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASU No. 2017-12, Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities (“ASU 2017-12”). ASU 2017-12 expands component and fair value hedging, specifies the presentation of the effects of hedging instruments, and eliminates the separate measurement and presentation of hedge ineffectiveness. The Company will adopt ASU 2017-12 in its first quarter of 2020 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method and is currently evaluating the impact of adoption on its consolidated financial statements. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 28 Income Taxes In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-16, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other Than Inventory (“ASU 2016-16”), which requires the recognition of the income tax consequences of an intra-entity transfer of an asset, other than inventory, when the transfer occurs. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-16 in its first quarter of 2019 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Currently, the Company estimates recording $3 billion of net deferred tax assets on its Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets upon adoption. However, the ultimate impact of adopting ASU 2016-16 will depend on the balance of intellectual property transferred between its subsidiaries as of the adoption date, as well as the deferred tax impact of the new minimum tax on certain future foreign earnings. The Company will recognize incremental deferred income tax expense thereafter as these net deferred tax assets are utilized. Leases In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which modifies lease accounting for lessees to increase transparency and comparability by recording lease assets and liabilities for operating leases and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-02 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method through a cumulative-effect adjustment at the beginning of its first quarter of 2020. While the Company is currently evaluating the impact of adopting ASU 2016-02, based on the lease portfolio as of September 29, 2018, the Company anticipates recording lease assets and liabilities of approximately $8.9 billion on its Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets, with no material impact to its Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations. However, the ultimate impact of adopting ASU 2016-02 will depend on the Company’s lease portfolio as of the adoption date. Financial Instruments In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-01, Financial Instruments - Overall (Subtopic 825-10): Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities (“ASU 2016-01”), which updates certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of financial instruments. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-01 in its first quarter of 2019 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Based on the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio, the adoption of ASU 2016-01 is not expected to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which modifies the measurement of expected credit losses of certain financial instruments. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-13 in its first quarter of 2021 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Based on the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio, current market conditions, and historical credit loss activity, the adoption of ASU 2016-13 is not expected to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. Revenue Recognition In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”), which amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. ASU 2014-09 is based on principles that govern the recognition of revenue at an amount an entity expects to be entitled when products are transferred to customers. Subsequently, the FASB issued additional ASUs to clarify the guidance in ASU 2014-09. ASU 2014-09 and its related ASUs are collectively referred to herein as the “new revenue standard.” The new revenue standard may be applied retrospectively to each prior period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect recognized as of the date of adoption. The Company will adopt the new revenue standard in its first quarter of 2019 utilizing the full retrospective transition method. The new revenue standard will not have a material impact on the amount and timing of revenue recognized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 29 Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 29, 2018, September 30, 2017 and September 24, 2016 (in millions): (1) As of September 29, 2018, total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities included $20.3 billion that was restricted from general use, related to the State Aid Decision and other agreements. (2) Refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Polices” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information on the prior period reclassification related to the Company’s adoption of ASU 2016-09. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. The Company currently anticipates the cash used for future dividends, the share repurchase program and debt repayments will come from its current cash and cash generated from ongoing operating activities. In connection with the State Aid Decision, as of September 29, 2018, the entire recovery amount of €13.1 billion plus interest of €1.2 billion was funded into escrow, where it will remain restricted from general use pending conclusion of all appeals. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is primarily invested in highly rated securities, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. The Company’s investment policy generally requires securities to be investment grade and limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. During 2018, cash generated by operating activities of $77.4 billion was a result of $59.5 billion of net income and an increase in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $34.7 billion, partially offset by non-cash adjustments to net income of $16.8 billion. Cash generated by investing activities of $16.1 billion during 2018 consisted primarily of proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities, net of purchases, of $32.4 billion, partially offset by cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $13.3 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $87.9 billion during 2018 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $72.7 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $13.7 billion and cash used to repay term debt of $6.5 billion, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of term debt, net of $7.0 billion. During 2017, cash generated by operating activities of $64.2 billion was a result of $48.4 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $20.8 billion and a decrease in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $4.9 billion, which included a one-time payment of $1.9 billion related to a multi-year license agreement. Cash used in investing activities of $46.4 billion during 2017 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $33.1 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $12.5 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $18.0 billion during 2017 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $32.9 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.8 billion and cash used to repay term debt of $3.5 billion, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of term debt, net of $28.7 billion and proceeds from commercial paper, net of $3.9 billion. Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $16.7 billion during 2018. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $14.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2019, which includes product tooling and manufacturing process equipment; data centers; corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements; and retail store facilities. Debt The Company issues unsecured short-term promissory notes (“Commercial Paper”) pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company uses the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September 29, 2018, the Company had $12.0 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 2.18% and maturities generally less than nine months. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 30 As of September 29, 2018, the Company had outstanding floating- and fixed-rate notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $104.2 billion (collectively the “Notes”). During 2018, the Company issued $7.0 billion and repaid $6.5 billion of Notes. The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. In addition, the Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into foreign currency swaps to manage foreign currency risk on the Notes. Further information regarding the Company’s debt issuances and related hedging activity can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 2, “Financial Instruments” and Note 5, “Debt.” Capital Return Program During 2018, the Company repurchased 405.5 million shares of its common stock for $73.1 billion in connection with two separate share repurchase programs. Of the $73.1 billion, $44.0 billion was repurchased under the Company’s previous share repurchase program of up to $210 billion, thereby completing that program. On May 1, 2018, the Company announced the Board of Directors had authorized a new program to repurchase up to $100 billion of the Company’s common stock. The remaining $29.0 billion repurchased during 2018 was in connection with the new share repurchase program. The Company’s new share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under this program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated and/or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. On May 1, 2018, the Company also announced the Board of Directors raised the Company’s quarterly cash dividend from $0.63 to $0.73 per share, beginning with the dividend paid during the third quarter of 2018. The Company intends to increase its dividend on an annual basis, subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. The Company plans to use current cash and cash generated from ongoing operating activities to fund its share repurchase program and quarterly cash dividend. Contractual Obligations The following table presents certain payments due by the Company as of September 29, 2018, and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for term debt and the deemed repatriation tax payable (in millions): (1) Represents amount expected to be paid under manufacturing-related supplier arrangements, substantially all of which is noncancelable. Operating Leases The Company’s retail store and other facility leases typically have original terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi-year renewal options. Manufacturing Purchase Obligations The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Other Purchase Obligations The Company’s other purchase obligations consist of noncancelable obligations to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and noncancelable obligations related to advertising, licensing, R&D, internet and telecommunications services, content creation and other activities. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 31 Deemed Repatriation Tax Payable As of September 29, 2018, a significant portion of the other non-current liabilities in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet consisted of the deemed repatriation tax payable imposed by the Act. The Company plans to pay the deemed repatriation tax payable in installments in accordance with the Act. Other Non-Current Liabilities The Company’s remaining other non-current liabilities primarily consist of items for which the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification Agreements entered into by the Company may include indemnification provisions which may subject the Company to costs and damages in the event of a claim against an indemnified third party. Except as disclosed in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 9, “Commitments and Contingencies” under the heading “Contingencies,” in the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to indemnification of third parties. The Company offers an iPhone Upgrade Program, which is available to customers who purchase a qualifying iPhone in the U.S., the U.K. and mainland China. The iPhone Upgrade Program provides customers the right to trade in that iPhone for a specified amount when purchasing a new iPhone, provided certain conditions are met. The Company accounts for the trade-in right as a guarantee liability and recognizes arrangement revenue net of the fair value of such right, with subsequent changes to the guarantee liability recognized within revenue. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers of the Company, and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. While the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage, such insurance coverage may be insufficient to cover all losses or all types of claims that may arise. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation, valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimation of purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 32 Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, accessories, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title, risk of loss and rewards of ownership have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. For payment terms in excess of the Company’s standard payment terms, revenue is recognized as payments become due unless the Company has positive evidence that the sales price is fixed or determinable, such as a successful history of collection, without concession, on comparable arrangements. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry-specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software and/or undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For sales of iPhone, iPad, Mac and certain other products, the Company has indicated it may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades to the device’s essential software and/or non-software services free of charge. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services based on the Company’s ESPs is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for unspecified software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services offered, the estimated value of unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services and the estimated period unspecified software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company’s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s operating results. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 33 Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are generally recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this determination, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment of whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Inventory Valuation, Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimation of Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company purchases components and builds inventory in advance of product shipments and invests in manufacturing-related assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities. In addition, the Company makes prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory. The Company performs a regular review of inventory that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels and component cost trends. If the Company determines inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value, it records a write-down of the inventories. The Company also reviews its manufacturing-related capital assets and inventory prepayments for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that an asset is not recoverable, it records an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value of such an asset exceeds its fair value. Any write-downs and/or impairments the Company may be required to record would adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. The Company accrues for estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees related to inventory orders that have been canceled or are expected to be canceled. Manufacturing purchase obligations cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements, typically for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products, a change in the Company’s product development plans, or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its operating results. Warranty Costs The Company accrues the estimated cost of warranties in the period the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost per claim and knowledge of specific product failures outside of the Company’s typical experience. The Company regularly reviews these estimates and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of its reported operating results. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that will be in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Apple Inc. | 2018 Form 10-K | 34 Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to recover the Company’s deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of its net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will record an adjustment to the valuation allowance and a corresponding charge to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Act, which significantly changed U.S. tax law. The Act lowered the Company’s U.S. statutory federal income tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, while also imposing a deemed repatriation tax on previously deferred foreign income. The Act also created a new minimum tax on certain future foreign earnings. The impact of the Act increased the Company’s provision for income taxes by $1.5 billion during 2018. This increase was composed of $2.0 billion related to the remeasurement of net deferred tax assets and liabilities and $1.2 billion associated with the deemed repatriation tax, partially offset by a $1.7 billion impact the deemed repatriation tax had on the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits. Certain amounts reported by the Company related to the Act are provisional estimates in accordance with the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118. Resolution of the Act’s effects different from the assumptions made by the Company could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 9, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable, the determination of which requires significant judgment. Except as described in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 9, “Commitments and Contingencies” under the heading “Contingencies,” in the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. The outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain. If one or more legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s financial condition and operating results for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Overview and Highlights The Company designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices and personal computers, and sells a variety of related software, services, accessories, networking solutions and third-party digital content and applications. The Company’s products and services include iPhone, iPad, Mac, Apple Watch, Apple TV, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, iOS, macOS, watchOS and tvOS operating systems, iCloud, Apple Pay and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company sells and delivers digital content and applications through the iTunes Store, App Store, Mac App Store, TV App Store, iBooks Store and Apple Music (collectively “Digital Content and Services”). The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Apple-compatible products, including application software and various accessories through its retail and online stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers. Fiscal Period The Company’s fiscal year is the 52 or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company’s fiscal year 2017 included 53 weeks and ended on September 30, 2017. A 14th week was included in the first quarter of 2017, as is done every five or six years, to realign the Company’s fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. The Company’s fiscal years 2016 and 2015 ended on September 24, 2016 and September 26, 2015, respectively, and spanned 52 weeks each. Fiscal 2017 Highlights Net sales increased 6% or $13.6 billion during 2017 compared to 2016, primarily driven by growth in Services, iPhone and Mac. The year-over-year increase in net sales reflected growth in each of the geographic operating segments, with the exception of Greater China. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on net sales during 2017 compared to 2016. In May 2017, the Company announced an increase to its capital return program by raising the expected total size of the program from $250 billion to $300 billion through March 2019. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization from $175 billion to $210 billion and raising its quarterly dividend from $0.57 to $0.63 per share beginning in May 2017. During 2017, the Company spent $33.0 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.8 billion. Additionally, the Company issued $24.0 billion of U.S. dollar-denominated term debt, €2.5 billion of euro-denominated term debt and C$2.5 billion of Canadian dollar-denominated term debt during 2017. Fiscal 2016 Highlights Net sales declined 8% or $18.1 billion during 2016 compared to 2015, primarily driven by a year-over-year decrease in iPhone net sales and the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by an increase in Services. In April 2016, the Company announced an increase to its capital return program by raising the expected total size of the program from $200 billion to $250 billion through March 2018. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization from $140 billion to $175 billion and raising its quarterly dividend from $0.52 to $0.57 per share beginning in May 2016. During 2016, the Company spent $29.0 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.2 billion. Additionally, the Company issued $23.9 billion of U.S. dollar-denominated term debt and A$1.4 billion of Australian dollar-denominated term debt during 2016. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 22 Sales Data The following table shows net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): (1) Includes deferrals and amortization of related software upgrade rights and non-software services. (2) Includes revenue from Digital Content and Services, AppleCare, Apple Pay, licensing and other services. Services net sales in the fourth quarter of 2017 included a favorable one-time adjustment of $640 million due to a change in estimate based on the availability of additional supporting information. (3) Includes sales of Apple TV, Apple Watch, Beats products, iPod touch and Apple-branded and third-party accessories. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 23 Product Performance iPhone The following table presents iPhone net sales and unit sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): iPhone net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due to higher iPhone unit sales and a different mix of iPhones with higher average selling prices. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on iPhone net sales during 2017 compared to 2016. iPhone net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015. The Company believes the sales decline was due primarily to a lower rate of iPhone upgrades during 2016 compared to 2015 and challenging macroeconomic conditions in a number of major markets in 2016. Average selling prices for iPhone were lower year-over-year during 2016 due primarily to a different mix of iPhones, including the iPhone SE introduced in 2016, and the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. iPad The following table presents iPad net sales and unit sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): iPad net sales decreased during 2017 compared to 2016 due to lower iPad unit sales and a different mix of iPads with lower average selling prices. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on iPad net sales during 2017 compared to 2016. iPad net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 primarily due to lower unit sales and the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by higher average selling price due to a shift in mix to higher-priced iPads. Mac The following table presents Mac net sales and unit sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): Mac net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to a different mix of Macs with higher average selling prices and higher Mac unit sales. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Mac net sales during 2017 compared to 2016. Mac net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 primarily due to lower year-over-year Mac unit sales, which declined at rates similar to the overall market. The effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar also negatively impacted Mac net sales. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 24 Services The following table presents Services net sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year growth in Services net sales in 2017 was due primarily to increases in App Store and licensing sales. Services net sales in the fourth quarter of 2017 included a favorable one-time adjustment of $640 million due to a change in estimate based on the availability of additional supporting information. The year-over-year increase in Services net sales in 2016 was due primarily to growth from the App Store, licensing and AppleCare sales, partially offset by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. During the first quarter of 2016, the Company received $548 million from Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. related to its patent infringement lawsuit, which was recorded as licensing net sales within Services. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. Americas includes both North and South America. Europe includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. Greater China includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Rest of Asia Pacific includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable segments. Although the reportable segments provide similar hardware and software products and similar services, each one is managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further information regarding the Company’s reportable segments can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Americas The following table presents Americas net sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions): Americas net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone, Services and Mac. Americas net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to lower net sales of iPhone. Europe The following table presents Europe net sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions): Europe net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone and Services. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Europe net sales during 2017 compared to 2016. Europe net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 driven primarily by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decrease in net sales of Mac, largely offset by an increase in iPhone unit sales and Services. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 25 Greater China The following table presents Greater China net sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions): Greater China net sales decreased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to lower net sales of iPhone, partially offset by higher net sales of Services. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on Greater China net sales during 2017 compared to 2016. Greater China net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to lower net sales of iPhone and the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Japan The following table presents Japan net sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in Japan net sales in 2017 and 2016 was due primarily to higher net sales of Services and the strength in the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Rest of Asia Pacific The following table presents Rest of Asia Pacific net sales information for 2017, 2016 and 2015 (dollars in millions): Rest of Asia Pacific net sales increased during 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to higher net sales of iPhone, Services and Mac. The strength in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact on Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2017 compared to 2016. Rest of Asia Pacific net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to lower net sales of iPhone and the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Gross Margin Gross margin for 2017, 2016 and 2015 was as follows (dollars in millions): Gross margin percentage decreased in 2017 compared to 2016 due primarily to higher product costs, partially offset by a favorable shift in mix to services. Year-over-year gross margin increased due primarily to a shift in mix to services and an overall increase in product volumes. The weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar had an unfavorable impact on gross margin percentage and gross margin during 2017 compared to 2016. Gross margin percentage decreased in 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and, to a lesser extent, unfavorable leverage on fixed costs from lower net sales, partially offset by a favorable shift in mix to services. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 26 The Company anticipates gross margin percentage during the first quarter of 2018 to be between 38.0% and 38.5%. The foregoing statement regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage in the first quarter of 2018 is forward-looking and could differ from actual results. The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by multiple factors including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors” and those described in this paragraph. In general, the Company believes gross margins will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry-wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions, potential increases in the cost of components, and potential strengthening of the U.S. dollar, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, its financial condition and operating results, including gross margins, could be significantly affected by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2017, 2016 and 2015 were as follows (dollars in millions): Research and Development The year-over-year growth in R&D expense in 2017 and 2016 was driven primarily by increases in headcount-related expenses and material costs to support expanded R&D activities. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace, and to the development of new and updated products and services that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. Selling, General and Administrative The year-over-year growth in selling, general and administrative expense in 2017 compared to 2016 was driven primarily by an increase in headcount-related expenses, variable selling expenses and infrastructure-related costs. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense in 2016 compared to 2015 was due primarily to lower discretionary expenditures and advertising costs, partially offset by an increase in headcount-related expenses. Other Income/(Expense), Net Other income/(expense), net for 2017, 2016 and 2015 was as follows (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in other income/(expense), net during 2017 was due primarily to higher interest income and the favorable impact of foreign exchange-related items, partially offset by higher interest expense on debt. The year-over-year increase in other income/(expense), net during 2016 was due primarily to higher interest income, partially offset by higher interest expense on debt and the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange-related items. The weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.99%, 1.73% and 1.49% in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 27 Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2017, 2016 and 2015 were as follows (dollars in millions): The Company’s effective tax rates for 2017, 2016 and 2015 differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings, a substantial portion of which was generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, for which no U.S. taxes are provided when such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. The lower effective tax rate in 2017 compared to 2016 was due to a different geographic mix of earnings and higher U.S. R&D tax credits. The lower effective tax rate in 2016 compared to 2015 was due primarily to greater R&D tax credits. As of September 30, 2017, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses and tax credits of $3.9 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $31.5 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and the amount of a valuation allowance. The IRS concluded its review of the years 2010 through 2012 during the third quarter of 2017. All years prior to 2013 are closed, and the IRS is currently examining the years 2013 through 2015. The Company is also subject to audits by state, local and foreign tax authorities. In major states and major foreign jurisdictions, the years subsequent to 2003 generally remain open and could be subject to examination by the taxing authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. On August 30, 2016, the European Commission announced its decision that Ireland granted state aid to the Company by providing tax opinions in 1991 and 2007 concerning the tax allocation of profits of the Irish branches of two subsidiaries of the Company (the “State Aid Decision”). The State Aid Decision orders Ireland to calculate and recover additional taxes from the Company for the period June 2003 through December 2014. Irish legislative changes, effective as of January 2015, eliminated the application of the tax opinions from that date forward. The Company believes the State Aid Decision to be without merit and appealed to the General Court of the Court of Justice of the European Union. Ireland has also appealed the State Aid Decision. Although Ireland is still computing the recovery amount, the Company expects the amount to be in line with the European Commission’s announced recovery amount of €13 billion, plus interest of €1 billion. Once the recovery amount is finalized by Ireland, the Company anticipates funding it, including interest, out of foreign cash. These amounts are expected to be placed into escrow in 2018, where they will remain pending conclusion of all appeals. The Company believes that any incremental Irish corporate income taxes potentially due related to the State Aid Decision would be creditable against U.S. taxes. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Hedging In August 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2017-12, Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815): Targeted Improvements to Accounting for Hedging Activities (“ASU 2017-12”). ASU 2017-12 expands component and fair value hedging, specifies the presentation of the effects of hedging instruments, and eliminates the separate measurement and presentation of hedge ineffectiveness. The Company will adopt ASU 2017-12 in its first quarter of 2020 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method and is currently evaluating the impact of adoption on its consolidated financial statements. Restricted Cash In November 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-18, Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230): Restricted Cash (“ASU 2016-18”), which enhances and clarifies the guidance on the classification and presentation of restricted cash in the statement of cash flows. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-18 in its first quarter of 2019 utilizing the retrospective transition method. Currently, the Company’s restricted cash balance is not significant. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 28 Income Taxes In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-16, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other Than Inventory (“ASU 2016-16”), which requires the recognition of the income tax consequences of an intra-entity transfer of an asset, other than inventory, when the transfer occurs. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-16 in its first quarter of 2019 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Currently, the Company anticipates recording up to $9 billion of net deferred tax assets on its Consolidated Balance Sheets upon adoption. However, the ultimate impact of adopting ASU 2016-16 will depend on the balance of intellectual property transferred between its subsidiaries as of the adoption date. The Company will recognize incremental deferred income tax expense thereafter as these deferred tax assets are utilized. Stock Compensation In March 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-09, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2016-09”), which modifies certain aspects of the accounting for share-based payment transactions, including income taxes, classification of awards, and classification in the statement of cash flows. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-09 in its first quarter of 2018. Currently, excess tax benefits or deficiencies from the Company’s equity awards are recorded as additional paid-in capital in its Consolidated Balance Sheets. Upon adoption, the Company will record any excess tax benefits or deficiencies from its equity awards in its Consolidated Statements of Operations in the reporting periods in which vesting occurs. As a result, subsequent to adoption the Company’s income tax expense and associated effective tax rate will be impacted by fluctuations in stock price between the grant dates and vesting dates of equity awards. Leases In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which modifies lease accounting for lessees to increase transparency and comparability by recording lease assets and liabilities for operating leases and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-02 in its first quarter of 2020 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. While the Company is currently evaluating the timing and impact of adopting ASU 2016-02, currently the Company anticipates recording lease assets and liabilities in excess of $9.5 billion on its Consolidated Balance Sheets, with no material impact to its Consolidated Statements of Operations. However, the ultimate impact of adopting ASU 2016-02 will depend on the Company’s lease portfolio as of the adoption date. Financial Instruments In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-01, Financial Instruments - Overall (Subtopic 825-10): Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities (“ASU 2016-01”), which updates certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of financial instruments. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-01 in its first quarter of 2019 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Based on the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio, the adoption of ASU 2016-01 is not expected to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which modifies the measurement of expected credit losses of certain financial instruments. The Company will adopt ASU 2016-13 in its first quarter of 2021 utilizing the modified retrospective transition method. Based on the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio, current market conditions, and historical credit loss activity, the adoption of ASU 2016-13 is not expected to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. Revenue Recognition In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”), which amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. ASU 2014-09 is based on principles that govern the recognition of revenue at an amount an entity expects to be entitled when products are transferred to customers. Subsequently, the FASB has issued the following standards related to ASU 2014-09: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations (“ASU 2016-08”); ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing (“ASU 2016-10”); ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients (“ASU 2016-12”); and ASU No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASU 2016-20”). The Company must adopt ASU 2016-08, ASU 2016-10, ASU 2016-12 and ASU 2016-20 with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the “new revenue standards”). The new revenue standards may be applied retrospectively to each prior period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect recognized as of the date of adoption. The Company will adopt the new revenue standards in its first quarter of 2019 utilizing the full retrospective transition method. The new revenue standards are not expected to have a material impact on the amount and timing of revenue recognized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 29 Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 30, 2017, September 24, 2016 and September 26, 2015 (in millions): The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. The Company currently anticipates the cash used for future dividends, the share repurchase program and debt repayments will come from its current domestic cash, cash generated from ongoing U.S. operating activities and from borrowings. As of September 30, 2017 and September 24, 2016, the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by foreign subsidiaries were $252.3 billion and $216.0 billion, respectively, and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. In connection with the State Aid Decision, Ireland is still computing the recovery amount. The Company expects the amount to be in line with the European Commission’s announced recovery amount of €13 billion, plus interest of €1 billion. Once the recovery amount is finalized by Ireland, the Company anticipates funding it, including interest, out of foreign cash. These amounts are expected to be placed into escrow in 2018, where they will remain pending conclusion of all appeals. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is primarily invested in highly-rated securities, and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy generally requires investments to be investment grade, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. During 2017, cash generated by operating activities of $63.6 billion was a result of $48.4 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $20.8 billion and a decrease in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $5.6 billion, which included a one-time payment of $1.9 billion related to a multi-year license agreement. Cash used in investing activities of $46.4 billion during 2017 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $33.1 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $12.5 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $17.3 billion during 2017 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $32.9 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.8 billion and cash used to repay term debt of $3.5 billion, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of term debt, net of $28.7 billion and proceeds from commercial paper, net of $3.9 billion. During 2016, cash generated by operating activities of $65.8 billion was a result of $45.7 billion of net income and non-cash adjustments to net income of $20.1 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $46.0 billion during 2016 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $30.6 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $12.7 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $20.5 billion during 2016 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $29.7 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.2 billion and cash used to repay term debt of $2.5 billion, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of term debt, net of $25.0 billion. Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $14.9 billion during 2017. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $16.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2018, which includes product tooling and manufacturing process equipment; data centers; corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements; and retail store facilities. Debt The Company issues unsecured short-term promissory notes (“Commercial Paper”) pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company uses the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September 30, 2017, the Company had $12.0 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 1.20% and maturities generally less than nine months. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 30 As of September 30, 2017, the Company had outstanding floating- and fixed-rate notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $104.0 billion (collectively the “Notes”). During 2017, the Company repaid $3.5 billion of its Notes upon maturity. The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. In addition, the Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into foreign currency swaps to manage foreign currency risk on the Notes. The future principal payments for the Company’s Notes as of September 30, 2017 are as follows (in millions): Further information regarding the Company’s debt issuances and related hedging activity can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 2, “Financial Instruments” and Note 6, “Debt.” Capital Return Program In May 2017, the Company’s Board of Directors increased the total capital return program from $250 billion to $300 billion, which included an increase in the share repurchase authorization from $175 billion to $210 billion of the Company’s common stock. Additionally, the Company announced that the Board of Directors raised the Company’s quarterly cash dividend from $0.57 to $0.63 per share, beginning with the dividend paid during the third quarter of 2017. The Company intends to increase its dividend on an annual basis, subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. As of September 30, 2017, $166 billion of the share repurchase program had been utilized. The Company’s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. The following table presents the Company’s dividends, dividend equivalents, share repurchases and net share settlement activity from the start of the capital return program in August 2012 through September 30, 2017 (in millions): The Company expects to execute its capital return program by the end of March 2019 by paying dividends and dividend equivalents, repurchasing shares and remitting withheld taxes related to net share settlement of restricted stock units. The Company plans to continue to access the domestic and international debt markets to assist in funding its capital return program. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company, or engages in leasing, hedging, or R&D services with the Company. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 31 The following table presents certain payments due by the Company as of September 30, 2017, and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for term debt (in millions): (1) Represents amount expected to be paid under manufacturing-related supplier arrangements, substantially all of which is noncancelable. Operating Leases As of September 30, 2017, the Company’s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were $9.5 billion. The Company’s retail store and other facility leases typically have original terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi-year renewal options. Manufacturing Purchase Obligations The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. As of September 30, 2017, the Company expects to pay $37.6 billion under manufacturing-related supplier arrangements, substantially all of which is noncancelable. Other Purchase Obligations The Company’s other purchase obligations consisted of noncancelable obligations to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and noncancelable obligations related to advertising, licensing, R&D, internet and telecommunications services and other obligations. As of September 30, 2017, the Company had other purchase obligations of $6.1 billion. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 30, 2017, the Company had deferred tax liabilities of $31.5 billion, gross unrecognized tax benefits of $8.4 billion and an additional $1.2 billion for gross interest and penalties. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification Agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions which may subject the Company to costs and damages in the event of a claim against an indemnified third party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to indemnification of third parties. The Company offers an iPhone Upgrade Program, which is available to customers who purchase a qualifying iPhone in the U.S., the U.K. and mainland China. The iPhone Upgrade Program provides customers the right to trade in that iPhone for a specified amount when purchasing a new iPhone, provided certain conditions are met. The Company accounts for the trade-in right as a guarantee liability and recognizes arrangement revenue net of the fair value of such right, with subsequent changes to the guarantee liability recognized within revenue. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers of the Company and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. While the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage, such insurance coverage may be insufficient to cover all losses or all types of claims that may arise. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 32 Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation, valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimation of purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, accessories, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title, risk of loss and rewards of ownership have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. For payment terms in excess of the Company’s standard payment terms, revenue is recognized as payments become due unless the Company has positive evidence that the sales price is fixed or determinable, such as a successful history of collection, without concession, on comparable arrangements. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry-specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software and/or undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For sales of qualifying versions of iOS devices, Mac, Apple Watch and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades to the device’s essential software and/or non-software services free of charge. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services based on the Company’s ESPs is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for unspecified software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services offered, the estimated value of unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services and the estimated period unspecified software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 33 The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company’s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s operating results. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this determination, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment of whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Inventory Valuation, Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimation of Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company must purchase components and build inventory in advance of product shipments and has invested in manufacturing-related assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities. In addition, the Company has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory components. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a regular review of inventory that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels and component cost trends. The Company also reviews its manufacturing-related capital assets and inventory prepayments for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that an asset is not recoverable, it records an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value of such an asset exceeds its fair value. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. In certain circumstances the Company may be required to record additional write-downs of inventory and/or impairments of manufacturing-related assets or inventory prepayments. These circumstances include future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products being less favorable than forecasted, unforeseen technological changes or changes to the Company’s product development plans that negatively impact the utility of any of these assets, or significant deterioration in the financial condition of one or more of the Company’s suppliers that hold any of the Company’s manufacturing-related assets or to whom the Company has made an inventory prepayment. Such write-downs would adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results in the period when the additional write-downs were recorded. The Company accrues for estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees related to inventory orders that have been canceled or are expected to be canceled. Manufacturing purchase obligations typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products, a change in the Company’s product development plans, or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees were identified and recorded. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 34 Warranty Costs The Company accrues for the estimated cost of warranties in the period the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost per claim and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. The Company regularly reviews these estimates and the current installed base of products subject to warranty protection to assess the appropriateness of its recorded warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities could be required and could materially affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of its reported operating results. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the Company’s deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of its net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will record an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable, the determination of which requires significant judgment. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Apple Inc. | 2017 Form 10-K | 35 Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Overview and Highlights The Company designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, accessories, networking solutions and third-party digital content and applications. The Company’s products and services include iPhone®, iPad®, Mac®, iPod®, Apple Watch®, Apple TV®, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, iOS, macOS™, watchOS® and tvOS™ operating systems, iCloud®, Apple Pay® and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company sells and delivers digital content and applications through the iTunes Store®, App Store®, Mac App Store, TV App Store, iBooks Store™ and Apple Music® (collectively “Internet Services”). The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Apple compatible products, including application software and various accessories through its retail and online stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers. Fiscal 2016 Highlights Net sales declined 8% or $18.1 billion during 2016 compared to 2015, primarily driven by a year-over-year decrease in iPhone net sales and the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by an increase in Services. In April 2016, the Company announced a significant increase to its capital return program by raising the expected total size of the program from $200 billion to $250 billion through March 2018. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization from $140 billion to $175 billion and raising its quarterly dividend from $0.52 to $0.57 per share beginning in May 2016. During 2016, the Company spent $29.0 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.2 billion. Additionally, the Company issued $23.9 billion of U.S. dollar-denominated term debt and A$1.4 billion of Australian dollar-denominated term debt during 2016. Fiscal 2015 Highlights Net sales rose 28% or $50.9 billion during 2015 compared to 2014, driven by a year-over-year increase in iPhone net sales. iPhone net sales and unit sales in 2015 increased in all of the Company’s reportable operating segments. The Company also experienced year-over-year net sales increases in Mac, Services and Other Products. Apple Watch, which launched during the third quarter of 2015, accounted for more than 100% of the year-over-year growth in net sales of Other Products. Net sales growth during 2015 was partially offset by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and lower iPad net sales. Total net sales increased in each of the Company’s reportable operating segments, with particularly strong growth in Greater China where year-over-year net sales increased 84%. In April 2015, the Company announced a significant increase to its capital return program by raising the expected total size of the program to $200 billion through March 2017. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization to $140 billion and raising its quarterly dividend to $0.52 per share beginning in May 2015. During 2015, the Company spent $36.0 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.6 billion. Additionally, the Company issued $14.5 billion of U.S. dollar-denominated, €4.8 billion of euro-denominated, SFr1.3 billion of Swiss franc-denominated, £1.3 billion of British pound-denominated, A$2.3 billion of Australian dollar-denominated and ¥250.0 billion of Japanese yen-denominated term debt during 2015. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 22 Sales Data The following table shows net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): (1) Includes deferrals and amortization of related software upgrade rights and non-software services. (2) Includes revenue from Internet Services, AppleCare®, Apple Pay, licensing and other services. (3) Includes sales of Apple TV, Apple Watch, Beats® products, iPod and Apple-branded and third-party accessories. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 23 Product Performance iPhone The following table presents iPhone net sales and unit sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): iPhone net sales and unit sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015. The Company believes the sales decline is due primarily to a lower rate of iPhone upgrades during 2016 compared to 2015 and challenging macroeconomic conditions in a number of major markets in 2016. Average selling prices (“ASPs”) for iPhone were lower year-over-year during 2016 due primarily to a different mix of iPhones, including the iPhone SE introduced in 2016, and the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The year-over-year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales during 2015 primarily resulted from strong demand for iPhone 6 and 6 Plus during 2015. Overall ASPs for iPhone increased during 2015 compared to 2014, due primarily to the introduction of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014, partially offset by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. iPad The following table presents iPad net sales and unit sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): iPad net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 primarily due to lower unit sales and the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by higher ASPs due to a shift in mix to higher-priced iPads. The Company believes the decline in iPad sales is due in part to a longer repurchase cycle for iPads and some level of cannibalization from the Company's other products. Net sales and unit sales for iPad declined during 2015 compared to 2014. The Company believes the decline in iPad sales is due in part to a longer repurchase cycle for iPads and some level of cannibalization from the Company's other products. iPad ASPs declined during 2015 compared to 2014, primarily as a result of the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a shift in mix to lower-priced iPads. Mac The following table presents Mac net sales and unit sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): Mac net sales and unit sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015. The year-over-year decline in Mac unit sales during 2016 was at rates similar to the overall market. The effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar also negatively impacted Mac net sales. The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales during 2015 was driven by strong demand for Mac portables. Mac ASPs declined during 2015 compared to 2014 largely due to the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 24 Services The following table presents net sales information of Services for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in net sales of Services in 2016 was due primarily to growth from the App Store, licensing and AppleCare sales, partially offset by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. During the first quarter of 2016, the Company received $548 million from Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. related to its patent infringement lawsuit, which was recorded as licensing net sales within Services. The increase in net sales of Services during 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to growth from the App Store and licensing. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. The Greater China segment includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable operating segments. Although the reportable operating segments provide similar hardware and software products and similar services, each one is managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further information regarding the Company’s reportable operating segments can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Americas The following table presents Americas net sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions): Americas net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to lower net sales and unit sales of iPhone. The year-over-year growth in Americas net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone, partially offset by a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad. Europe The following table presents Europe net sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions): Europe net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 driven primarily by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decrease in unit sales of Mac, largely offset by an increase in iPhone unit sales and Services. The year-over-year increase in Europe net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone, partially offset by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 25 Greater China The following table presents Greater China net sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions): Greater China net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to lower net sales and unit sales of iPhone and the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Greater China experienced strong year-over-year increases in net sales during 2015 driven primarily by iPhone sales. Japan The following table presents Japan net sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions): Japan net sales increased during 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to higher net sales of Services and the strength in the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. The year-over-year increase in Japan net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in Services largely associated with strong App Store sales, partially offset by the effect of weakness in the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Rest of Asia Pacific The following table presents Rest of Asia Pacific net sales information for 2016, 2015 and 2014 (dollars in millions): Rest of Asia Pacific net sales decreased during 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to lower net sales and unit sales of iPhone and the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The year-over-year increase in Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2015 primarily reflects strong growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone, partially offset by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad. Gross Margin Gross margin for 2016, 2015 and 2014 is as follows (dollars in millions): Gross margin decreased in 2016 compared to 2015 due primarily to the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and, to a lesser extent, unfavorable leverage on fixed costs from lower net sales, partially offset by a favorable shift in mix to Services. The year-over-year increase in the gross margin percentage in 2015 was driven primarily by a favorable shift in mix to products with higher margins and, to a lesser extent, by improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales. These positive factors were partially offset primarily by higher product cost structures and, to a lesser extent, by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 26 The Company anticipates gross margin during the first quarter of 2017 to be between 38% and 38.5%. The foregoing statement regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage in the first quarter of 2017 is forward-looking and could differ from actual results. The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by multiple factors including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors” and those described in this paragraph. In general, the Company believes gross margins will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions, potential increases in the cost of components, and potential strengthening of the U.S. dollar, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, its financial condition and operating results, including gross margins, could be significantly affected by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2016, 2015 and 2014 are as follows (dollars in millions): Research and Development The year-over-year growth in R&D expense in 2016 and 2015 was driven primarily by an increase in headcount and related expenses, and material costs to support expanded R&D activities. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace, and to the development of new and updated products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. Selling, General and Administrative The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense in 2016 compared to 2015 was due primarily to lower discretionary expenditures and advertising costs, partially offset by an increase in headcount and related expenses. The year-over-year growth in selling, general and administrative expense in 2015 was primarily due to increased headcount and related expenses, and higher spending on marketing and advertising. Other Income/(Expense), Net Other income/(expense), net for 2016, 2015 and 2014 are as follows (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in other income/(expense), net during 2016 and 2015 was due primarily to higher interest income, partially offset by higher interest expense on debt and higher expenses associated with foreign exchange activity. The weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.73%, 1.49% and 1.11% in 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 27 Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2016, 2015 and 2014 are as follows (dollars in millions): The Company’s effective tax rates for 2016, 2015 and 2014 differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings, a substantial portion of which was generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, for which no U.S. taxes are provided when such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. The lower effective tax rate in 2016 compared to 2015 was due primarily to greater R&D tax credits. The higher effective tax rate during 2015 compared to 2014 was due primarily to higher foreign taxes. As of September 24, 2016, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses and tax credits of $4.1 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $26.0 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and the amount of a valuation allowance. During the fourth quarter of 2016, the Company reached a partial settlement with the IRS on its examination of the years 2010 through 2012. In connection with this settlement, the Company recognized a tax benefit in the fourth quarter of 2016 that was not significant to its consolidated financial statements. All years prior to 2013 are closed, except for the years 2010 through 2012 relating to R&D tax credits. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local and foreign tax authorities. In major states and major foreign jurisdictions, the years subsequent to 2003 generally remain open and could be subject to examination by the taxing authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. On August 30, 2016, the European Commission announced its decision that Ireland granted state aid to the Company by providing tax opinions in 1991 and 2007 concerning the tax allocation of profits of the Irish branches of two subsidiaries of the Company (the "State Aid Decision"). The State Aid Decision orders Ireland to calculate and recover additional taxes from the Company for the period June 2003 through September 2014. Irish legislative changes, effective as of the beginning of 2015, eliminated the application of the tax opinions from that date forward. The Company believes the State Aid Decision to be without merit and intends to appeal to the General Court of the Court of Justice of the European Union. Ireland has also announced its intention to appeal the State Aid Decision. While the European Commission announced a recovery amount of up to €13 billion, plus interest, the actual amount of additional taxes subject to recovery is to be calculated by Ireland in accordance with the European Commission's guidance. Once the recovery amount is computed by Ireland, the Company anticipates funding it, including interest, out of foreign cash into escrow, pending conclusion of all appeals. The Company believes that any incremental Irish corporate income taxes potentially due would be creditable against U.S. taxes. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Income Taxes In October 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-16, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfer of Assets Other than Inventory ("ASU 2016-16"), which requires the recognition of the income tax consequences of an intra-entity transfer of an asset, other than inventory, when the transfer occurs. ASU 2016-06 will be effective for the Company in its first quarter of 2019. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of adopting ASU 2016-16 on its consolidated financial statements. Stock Compensation In March 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-09, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2016-09”), which simplified certain aspects of the accounting for share-based payment transactions, including income taxes, classification of awards and classification on the statement of cash flows. ASU 2016-09 will be effective for the Company beginning in its first quarter of 2018. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of adopting ASU 2016-09 on its consolidated financial statements. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 28 Leases In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”), which modified lease accounting for both lessees and lessors to increase transparency and comparability by recognizing lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous accounting standards and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. ASU 2016-02 will be effective for the Company beginning in its first quarter of 2020, and early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the timing of its adoption and the impact of adopting ASU 2016-02 on its consolidated financial statements. Financial Instruments In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-01, Financial Instruments - Overall (Subtopic 825-10): Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities (“ASU 2016-01”), which updates certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of financial instruments. ASU 2016-01 will be effective for the Company beginning in its first quarter of 2019. The Company does not believe the adoption of ASU 2016-01 will have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which modifies the measurement of expected credit losses of certain financial instruments. ASU 2016-13 will be effective for the Company beginning in its first quarter of 2021 and early adoption is permitted. The Company does not believe the adoption of ASU 2016-13 will have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. Revenue Recognition In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”), which amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. ASU 2014-09 is based on principles that govern the recognition of revenue at an amount an entity expects to be entitled when products are transferred to customers. ASU 2014-09 will be effective for the Company beginning in its first quarter of 2019, and early adoption is permitted. Subsequently, the FASB has issued the following standards related to ASU 2014-09: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations (“ASU 2016-08”); ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing (“ASU 2016-10”); and ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients (“ASU 2016-12”). The Company must adopt ASU 2016-08, ASU 2016-10 and ASU 2016-12 with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the “new revenue standards”). The new revenue standards may be applied retrospectively to each prior period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect recognized as of the date of adoption. The Company currently expects to adopt the new revenue standards in its first quarter of 2018 utilizing the full retrospective transition method. The Company does not expect adoption of the new revenue standards to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 24, 2016, September 26, 2015 and September 27, 2014 (in millions): The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. The Company currently anticipates the cash used for future dividends, the share repurchase program and debt repayments will come from its current domestic cash, cash generated from on-going U.S. operating activities and from borrowings. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 29 As of September 24, 2016 and September 26, 2015, the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by foreign subsidiaries were $216.0 billion and $186.9 billion, respectively, and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. In connection with the State Aid Decision, the European Commission announced a recovery amount of up to €13 billion, plus interest. The actual amount of additional taxes subject to recovery is to be calculated by Ireland in accordance with the European Commission's guidance. Once the recovery amount is computed by Ireland, the Company anticipates funding it, including interest, out of foreign cash into escrow, pending conclusion of all appeals. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly-rated securities and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy requires investments generally to be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. During 2016, cash generated from operating activities of $65.8 billion was a result of $45.7 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $19.7 billion and an increase in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $484 million. Cash used in investing activities of $46.0 billion during 2016 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $30.6 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $12.7 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $20.5 billion during 2016 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $29.7 billion, cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $12.2 billion and cash used to repay term debt of $2.5 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt of $25.0 billion. During 2015, cash generated from operating activities of $81.3 billion was a result of $53.4 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $16.2 billion and an increase in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $11.6 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $56.3 billion during 2015 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $44.4 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $11.2 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $17.7 billion during 2015 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $35.3 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.6 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt of $27.1 billion. Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $12.8 billion during 2016. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $16.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2017, which includes product tooling and manufacturing process equipment; data centers; corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements; and retail store facilities. Debt The Company issues unsecured short-term promissory notes (“Commercial Paper”) pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company uses the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September 24, 2016, the Company had $8.1 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.45% and maturities generally less than nine months. As of September 24, 2016, the Company has outstanding floating- and fixed-rate notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $78.4 billion (collectively the “Notes”). During 2016, the Company repaid $2.5 billion of its Notes upon maturity. The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. In addition, the Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into currency swaps to manage foreign currency risk on the Notes. The future principal payments for the Company’s Notes as of September 24, 2016 are as follows (in millions): Further information regarding the Company’s debt issuances and related hedging activity can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 2, “Financial Instruments” and Note 6, “Debt.” Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 30 Capital Return Program In April 2016, the Company’s Board of Directors increased the share repurchase program authorization from $140 billion to $175 billion of the Company’s common stock, increasing the expected total size of the capital return program from $200 billion to $250 billion. Additionally in April 2016, the Company announced that the Board of Directors raised the rate of the Company's quarterly cash dividend by 10% from $0.52 to $0.57 per share, beginning with the dividend paid during the third quarter of 2016. The Company intends to increase its dividend on an annual basis subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. As of September 24, 2016, $133 billion of the share repurchase program has been utilized. The Company’s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. The following table presents the Company’s dividends, dividend equivalents, share repurchases and net share settlement activity from the start of the capital return program in August 2012 through September 24, 2016 (in millions): The Company expects to execute its capital return program by the end of March 2018 by paying dividends and dividend equivalents, repurchasing shares and remitting withheld taxes related to net share settlement of restricted stock units. The Company plans to continue to access the domestic and international debt markets to assist in funding its capital return program. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company, or engages in leasing, hedging, or R&D services with the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 24, 2016, and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for term debt (in millions): Operating Leases As of September 24, 2016, the Company’s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were $7.6 billion. The Company’s retail store and other facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi-year renewal options. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 31 Manufacturing Purchase Obligations The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. As of September 24, 2016, the Company had manufacturing purchase obligations of $28.6 billion. Other Purchase Obligations The Company’s other purchase obligations were comprised of commitments to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to advertising, licensing, R&D, internet and telecommunications services, energy and other obligations. As of September 24, 2016, the Company had other purchase obligations of $6.6 billion. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 24, 2016, the Company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $26.0 billion. Additionally, as of September 24, 2016, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $7.7 billion and an additional $1.0 billion for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or application software for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights. The Company offers an iPhone Upgrade Program, which is available to customers who purchase a qualifying iPhone in the U.S., the U.K. and mainland China. The iPhone Upgrade Program provides customers the right to trade in that iPhone for a specified amount when purchasing a new iPhone, provided certain conditions are met. The Company accounts for the trade-in right as a guarantee liability and recognizes arrangement revenue net of the fair value of such right with subsequent changes to the guarantee liability recognized within revenue. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation, valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimation of purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 32 Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, accessories, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title, risk of loss and rewards of ownership have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. For payment terms in excess of the Company’s standard payment terms, revenue is recognized as payments become due unless the Company has positive evidence that the sales price is fixed or determinable, such as a successful history of collection, without concession, on comparable arrangements. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry-specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software and/or undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For sales of qualifying versions of iOS devices, Mac, Apple Watch and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades to the device’s essential software and/or non-software services free of charge. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services based on the Company’s ESPs is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for unspecified software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services offered, the estimated value of unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services and the estimated period unspecified software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company’s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s operating results. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 33 Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this determination, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment of whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s operating results. Inventory Valuation, Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimation of Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company must purchase components and build inventory in advance of product shipments and has invested in manufacturing-related assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities. In addition, the Company has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory components. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels and component cost trends. The Company also reviews its manufacturing-related capital assets and inventory prepayments for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that an asset is not recoverable, it records an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value of such an asset exceeds its fair value. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. In certain circumstances the Company may be required to record additional write-downs of inventory and/or impairments of manufacturing-related assets or inventory prepayments. These circumstances include future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products being less favorable than forecasted, unforeseen technological changes or changes to the Company’s product development plans that negatively impact the utility of any of these assets, or significant deterioration in the financial condition of one or more of the Company’s suppliers that hold any of the Company’s manufacturing-related assets or to whom the Company has made an inventory prepayment. Such write-downs would adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results in the period when the additional write-downs were recorded. The Company accrues for estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees related to inventory orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders in each case based on projected demand. Manufacturing purchase obligations typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products, a change in the Company’s product development plans, or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees were identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company accrues for the estimated cost of warranties in the period the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. The Company regularly reviews these estimates and the current installed base of products subject to warranty protection to assess the appropriateness of its recorded warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 34 Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of its reported operating results. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will record an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable, the determination of which requires significant judgment. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Apple Inc. | 2016 Form 10-K | 35 Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Overview and Highlights The Company designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, accessories, networking solutions and third-party digital content and applications. The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Apple compatible products, including application software and various accessories through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses and education, enterprise and government customers. Fiscal 2015 Highlights Net sales rose 28% or $50.9 billion during 2015 compared to 2014, driven by a 52% year-over-year increase in iPhone® net sales. iPhone net sales and unit sales in 2015 increased in all of the Company’s reportable operating segments. The Company also experienced year-over-year net sales increases in Mac®, Services and Other Products. Apple Watch®, which launched during the third quarter of 2015, accounted for more than 100% of the year-over-year growth in net sales of Other Products. Net sales growth during 2015 was partially offset by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and lower iPad® net sales. Total net sales increased in each of the Company’s reportable operating segments, with particularly strong growth in Greater China where year-over-year net sales increased 84%. In April 2015, the Company announced a significant increase to its capital return program by raising the expected total size of the program to $200 billion through March 2017. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization to $140 billion and raising its quarterly dividend to $0.52 per share beginning in May 2015. During 2015, the Company spent $36.0 billion to repurchase shares of its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.6 billion. Additionally, the Company issued $14.5 billion of U.S. dollar-denominated, 4.8 billion of euro-denominated, SFr1.3 billion of Swiss franc-denominated, £1.3 billion of British pound-denominated, A$2.3 billion of Australian dollar-denominated and ¥250.0 billion of Japanese yen-denominated term debt during 2015. Fiscal 2014 Highlights Net sales rose 7% or $11.9 billion during 2014 compared to 2013. This was driven by increases in net sales of iPhone, Mac and Services. Net sales and unit sales increased for iPhone primarily due to the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in the latter half of calendar year 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus beginning in the fourth quarter of 2014, and expanded distribution. Mac net sales and unit sales increased primarily due to strong demand for MacBook Air® and MacBook Pro® which were updated in 2014 with faster processors and offered at lower prices. Net sales of Services grew primarily due to increased revenue from sales through the App Store®, AppleCare® and licensing. Growth in these areas was partially offset by the year-over-year decline in net sales for iPad due to lower unit sales in many markets, and a decline in net sales of Other Products. All of the Company’s operating segments other than the Rest of Asia Pacific segment experienced increased net sales in 2014, with growth being strongest in the Greater China and Japan operating segments. During 2014, the Company completed various business acquisitions, including the acquisitions of Beats Music, LLC, which offers a subscription streaming music service, and Beats Electronics, LLC, which makes Beats® headphones, speakers and audio software. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 23 In April 2014, the Company increased its share repurchase authorization to $90 billion and the quarterly dividend was raised to $0.47 per common share, resulting in an overall increase in its capital return program from $100 billion to over $130 billion. During 2014, the Company utilized $45 billion to repurchase its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.1 billion. The Company also issued $12.0 billion of long-term debt during 2014, with varying maturities through 2044, and launched a commercial paper program, with $6.3 billion outstanding as of September 27, 2014. Sales Data The following table shows net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): (1) Includes deferrals and amortization of related software upgrade rights and non-software services. (2) Includes revenue from the iTunes Store®, App Store, Mac App Store, iBooks Store™ and Apple Music™ (collectively “Internet Services”), AppleCare, Apple Pay®, licensing and other services. (3) Includes sales of Apple TV®, Apple Watch, Beats products, iPod and Apple-branded and third-party accessories. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 24 Product Performance iPhone The following table presents iPhone net sales and unit sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): The year-over-year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales during 2015 primarily resulted from strong demand for iPhone 6 and 6 Plus during 2015. Overall average selling prices (“ASPs”) for iPhone increased by 11% during 2015 compared to 2014, due primarily to the introduction of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014, partially offset by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The year-over-year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales in 2014 resulted primarily from the successful introduction of new iPhones in the latter half of calendar year 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus beginning in September 2014, and expanded distribution. iPhone unit sales grew in all of the Company’s operating segments, while iPhone net sales grew in all segments except Rest of Asia Pacific. Overall ASPs for iPhone were relatively flat in 2014 compared to 2013, with growth in ASPs in the Americas segment being offset by a decline in ASPs in the Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific segments. iPad The following table presents iPad net sales and unit sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): Net sales and unit sales for iPad declined during 2015 compared to 2014. The Company believes the decline in iPad sales is due in part to a longer repurchase cycle for iPads and some level of cannibalization from the Company’s other products. iPad ASPs declined by 5% during 2015 compared to 2014, primarily as a result of the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a shift in mix to lower-priced iPads. Net sales and unit sales for iPad declined in 2014 compared to 2013. iPad net sales and unit sales grew in the Greater China and Japan segments but this growth was more than offset by a decline in all other segments. Overall iPad ASPs were relatively flat in 2014 compared to 2013 with a shift in mix to higher-priced iPads being offset by the October 2013 price reduction of iPad mini™. ASPs increased in the Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific segments but were slightly down in other segments. Mac The following table presents Mac net sales and unit sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales during 2015 was driven by strong demand for Mac portables. Mac ASPs declined 3% during 2015 compared to 2014 largely due to the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales for 2014 was primarily driven by increased sales of MacBook Air, MacBook Pro and Mac Pro. Mac net sales and unit sales increased in all of the Company’s operating segments. Mac ASPs decreased during 2014 compared to 2013 primarily due to price reductions on certain Mac models and a shift in mix towards Mac portable systems. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 25 Services The following table presents net sales information of Services for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions): The increase in net sales of Services during 2015 compared to 2014 was primarily due to growth from Internet Services and licensing. The App Store, included within Internet Services, generated strong year-over-year net sales growth of 29%. The increase in net sales of Services in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to growth in net sales from Internet Services, AppleCare and licensing. Internet Services generated a total of $10.2 billion in net sales during 2014 compared to $9.3 billion during 2013. Growth in net sales from Internet Services was driven by increases in revenue from app sales reflecting continued growth in the installed base of iOS devices and the expanded offerings of iOS apps and related in-app purchases. This was partially offset by a decline in sales of digital music. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. The Greater China segment includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and those Asian countries not included in the Company’s other reportable operating segments. Although, each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services, they are managed separately to better align with the location of the Company’s customers and distribution partners and the unique market dynamics of each geographic region. Further information regarding the Company’s reportable operating segments can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Americas The following table presents Americas net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year growth in Americas net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone, partially offset by a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad. The growth in the Americas segment in 2014 was due to increased net sales of iPhone, Mac and Services that was partially offset by a decline in net sales of iPad and Other Products and weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar compared to 2013. iPhone growth resulted primarily from the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in September 2013 and the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014. Mac growth was driven primarily by increased net sales and unit sales of MacBook Air and Mac Pro. Europe The following table presents Europe net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in Europe net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone, partially offset by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad. The growth in the Europe segment in 2014 was due to increased net sales of iPhone, Mac and Services, as well as strength in European currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by a decline in net sales of iPad. iPhone growth resulted primarily from the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in the second half of calendar 2013 and the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in over 20 countries in Europe in September 2014. Mac growth was driven primarily by increased net sales and unit sales of MacBook Air, MacBook Pro and Mac Pro. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 26 Greater China The following table presents Greater China net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions): Greater China experienced strong year-over-year increases in net sales during 2015 driven primarily by iPhone sales. The Greater China segment experienced year-over-year growth in net sales in 2014 that was significantly higher than the growth rate for the Company overall. Greater China growth was driven by higher unit sales and net sales of all major product categories, in addition to higher net sales of Services. Growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone was especially strong, driven by the successful launch of iPhone 5s and 5c in Mainland China and Hong Kong in September 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in Hong Kong in September 2014, increased demand for the Company’s entry-priced iPhones and the addition of a significant new carrier in the second quarter of 2014. Japan The following table presents Japan net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in Japan net sales during 2015 was driven primarily by growth in Services largely associated with strong App Store sales, partially offset by the effect of weakness in the Japanese yen relative to the U.S. dollar. In 2014 the Japan segment generated year-over-year increases in net sales and unit sales of every major product category and experienced growth in net sales of Services. The year-over-year growth in iPhone was driven by the successful launch of iPhone 5s and 5c in September 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014, increased demand for the Company’s entry-priced iPhones and the addition of a significant new carrier in the fourth quarter of 2013. These positive factors were partially offset by weakness in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Rest of Asia Pacific The following table presents Rest of Asia Pacific net sales information for 2015, 2014 and 2013 (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in Rest of Asia Pacific net sales during 2015 primarily reflects strong growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone, partially offset by the effect of weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar and a decline in net sales and unit sales of iPad. Net sales in the Rest of Asia Pacific segment declined in 2014 compared to 2013 due to year-over-year reductions in net sales in all major product categories except Mac and reductions in unit sales of iPad. Net sales in 2014 were also negatively affected by the weakness in several foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, including the Australian dollar. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 27 Gross Margin Gross margin for 2015, 2014 and 2013 is as follows (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in the gross margin percentage in 2015 was driven primarily by a favorable shift in mix to products with higher margins and, to a lesser extent, by improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales. These positive factors were partially offset primarily by higher product cost structures and, to a lesser extent, by the effect of weakness in most foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. The year-over-year increase in the gross margin percentage in 2014 was driven by multiple factors including lower commodity costs, a favorable shift in mix to products with higher margins and improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales, which was partially offset by the weakness in several foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, price reductions on select products and higher cost structures on certain new products. The Company anticipates gross margin during the first quarter of 2016 to be between 39% and 40%. The foregoing statement regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage in the first quarter of 2016 is forward-looking and could differ from actual results. The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by multiple factors including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors” and those described in this paragraph. In general, the Company believes gross margins will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions, potential increases in the cost of components, and potential strengthening of the U.S. dollar, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, its financial condition and operating results, including gross margins, could be significantly affected by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2015, 2014 and 2013 are as follows (dollars in millions): Research and Development The year-over-year growth in R&D expense in 2015 and 2014 was driven primarily by an increase in headcount and related expenses, including share-based compensation costs, and material costs to support expanded R&D activities. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and updated products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. Selling, General and Administrative The year-over-year growth in selling, general and administrative expense in 2015 and 2014 was primarily due to increased headcount and related expenses, including share-based compensation costs, and higher spending on marketing and advertising. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 28 Other Income/(Expense), Net Other income/(expense), net for 2015, 2014 and 2013 are as follows (dollars in millions): The increase in other income/(expense), net during 2015 compared to 2014 was due primarily to higher interest income, partially offset by higher expenses associated with foreign exchange activity and higher interest expense on debt. The decrease in other income and expense during 2014 compared to 2013 was due primarily to higher interest expense on debt and higher expenses associated with foreign exchange rate movements, partially offset by lower premium expenses on foreign exchange contracts and higher interest income. The weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.49%, 1.11% and 1.03% in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2015, 2014 and 2013 are as follows (dollars in millions): The Company’s effective tax rates for 2015, 2014 and 2013 differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings, a substantial portion of which was generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, for which no U.S. taxes are provided when such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. The higher effective tax rate during 2015 compared to 2014 was due primarily to higher foreign taxes. The effective tax rate in 2014 compared to 2013 was relatively flat. As of September 26, 2015, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses and tax credits of $7.8 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $24.1 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and the amount of a valuation allowance. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service is currently examining the years 2010 through 2012, and all years prior to 2010 are closed. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local and foreign tax authorities. In major states and major foreign jurisdictions, the years subsequent to 2003 generally remain open and could be subject to examination by the taxing authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. On June 11, 2014, the European Commission issued an opening decision initiating a formal investigation against Ireland for alleged state aid to the Company. The opening decision concerns the allocation of profits for taxation purposes of the Irish branches of two subsidiaries of the Company. The Company believes the European Commission’s assertions are without merit. If the European Commission were to conclude against Ireland, the European Commission could require Ireland to recover from the Company past taxes covering a period of up to 10 years reflective of the disallowed state aid. While such amount could be material, as of September 26, 2015 the Company is unable to estimate the impact. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 29 Recent Accounting Pronouncements In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”), which amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. ASU 2014-09 is based on principles that govern the recognition of revenue at an amount an entity expects to be entitled when products are transferred to customers. The original effective date for ASU 2014-09 would have required the Company to adopt beginning in its first quarter of 2018. In August 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-14, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) - Deferral of the Effective Date, which defers the effective date of ASU 2014-09 for one year and permits early adoption as early as the original effective date of ASU 2014-09. Accordingly, the Company may adopt the standard in either its first quarter of 2018 or 2019. The new revenue standard may be applied retrospectively to each prior period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect recognized as of the date of adoption. The Company is currently evaluating the timing of its adoption and the impact of adopting the new revenue standard on its consolidated financial statements. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 26, 2015, September 27, 2014 and September 28, 2013 (in millions): The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. The Company currently anticipates the cash used for future dividends, the share repurchase program and debt repayments will come from its current domestic cash, cash generated from on-going U.S. operating activities and from borrowings. As of September 26, 2015 and September 27, 2014, the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by foreign subsidiaries were $186.9 billion and $137.1 billion, respectively, and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly-rated securities and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy requires investments generally to be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. During 2015, cash generated from operating activities of $81.3 billion was a result of $53.4 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $16.2 billion and an increase in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $11.7 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $56.3 billion during 2015 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $44.4 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $11.2 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $17.7 billion during 2015 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $35.3 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.6 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt of $27.1 billion. During 2014, cash generated from operating activities of $59.7 billion was a result of $39.5 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $13.2 billion and an increase in net change in operating assets and liabilities of $7.0 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $22.6 billion during 2014 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $9.0 billion; cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $9.6 billion; and cash paid for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $3.8 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $37.5 billion during 2014 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $45.0 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.1 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of term debt and commercial paper of $12.0 billion and $6.3 billion, respectively. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 30 Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $11.2 billion during 2015. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $15.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2016, which includes product tooling and manufacturing process equipment; data centers; corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements; and retail store facilities. Debt In 2014, the Board of Directors authorized the Company to issue unsecured short-term promissory notes (“Commercial Paper”) pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September 26, 2015, the Company had $8.5 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.14% and maturities generally less than nine months. As of September 26, 2015, the Company has outstanding floating- and fixed-rate notes for an aggregate principal amount of $55.7 billion (collectively the “Notes”). The Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. In addition, the Company has entered, and in the future may enter, into currency swaps to manage foreign currency risk on the Notes. The future principal payments for the Company’s Notes as of September 26, 2015 are as follows (in millions): Further information regarding the Company’s debt issuances and related hedging activity can be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 2, “Financial Instruments” and Note 6, “Debt.” Capital Return Program In April 2015, the Company’s Board of Directors increased the share repurchase program authorization from $90 billion to $140 billion of the Company’s common stock, increasing the expected total size of the capital return program to $200 billion. The Company expects to execute the capital return program by the end of March 2017 by paying dividends and dividend equivalents, repurchasing shares and remitting withheld taxes related to net share settlement of restricted stock units. To assist in funding its capital return program, the Company expects to continue to access the debt markets, both domestically and internationally. As of September 26, 2015, $104 billion of the share repurchase program has been utilized. The Company’s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. In April 2015, the Company’s Board of Directors raised the quarterly cash dividend by 11%. The Company plans to increase its dividend on an annual basis subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. The following table presents the Company’s dividends, dividend equivalents, share repurchases and net share settlement activity from the start of the capital return program in August 2012 through September 26, 2015 (in millions): Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 31 Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company, or engages in leasing, hedging, or R&D services with the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 26, 2015, and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for term debt (in millions): Operating Leases The Company’s major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi-year renewal options. As of September 26, 2015, the Company had a total of 463 retail stores. Leases for retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. As of September 26, 2015, the Company’s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were $6.3 billion, of which $3.6 billion related to leases for retail space. Purchase Commitments The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Where appropriate, the purchases are applied to inventory component prepayments that are outstanding with the respective supplier. As of September 26, 2015, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of $29.5 billion. Other Obligations The Company’s other off-balance sheet obligations were comprised of commitments to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to inventory prepayments, advertising, licensing, R&D, internet and telecommunications services, energy and other obligations. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 26, 2015, the Company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $24.1 billion. Additionally, as of September 26, 2015, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $6.9 billion and an additional $1.3 billion for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or application software for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights. The Company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of September 26, 2015 or September 27, 2014. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 32 In September 2015, the Company introduced the iPhone Upgrade Program, which is available to customers who purchase an iPhone 6s and 6s Plus in one of its U.S. physical retail stores and activate the purchased iPhone with one of the four national carriers. The iPhone Upgrade Program provides customers the right to trade in that iPhone for a new iPhone, provided certain conditions are met. One of the conditions of this program requires the customer to finance the initial purchase price of the iPhone with a third-party lender. Upon exercise of the trade-in right and purchase of a new iPhone, the Company satisfies the customer’s outstanding balance due to the third-party lender on the original device. The Company accounts for the trade-in right as a guarantee liability and recognizes arrangement revenue net of the fair value of such right with subsequent changes to the guarantee liability recognized within revenue. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, accessories, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title, risk of loss and rewards of ownership have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. For payment terms in excess of the Company’s standard payment terms, revenue is recognized as payments become due unless the Company has positive evidence that the sales price is fixed or determinable, such as a successful history of collection, without concession, on comparable arrangements. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry-specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software and/or undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 33 For sales of qualifying versions of iOS devices, Mac, Apple Watch and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades to the device’s essential software and/or non-software services free of charge. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services based on the Company’s ESPs is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for unspecified software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services offered, the estimated value of unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services and the estimated period unspecified software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company’s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s operating results. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment on whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s operating results. Inventory Valuation and Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimated Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company must purchase components and build inventory in advance of product shipments and has invested in manufacturing-related assets, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities. In addition, the Company has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory components. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels and component cost trends. The Company also reviews its manufacturing-related capital assets and inventory prepayments for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that an asset is not recoverable, it records an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value of such an asset exceeds its fair value. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. In certain circumstances the Company may be required to record additional write-downs of inventory and/or manufacturing-related assets. These circumstances include future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products being less favorable than forecasted, unforeseen technological changes or changes to the Company’s product development plans that negatively impact the utility of any of these assets, or significant deterioration in the financial condition of one or more of the Company’s suppliers that hold any of the Company’s manufacturing-related assets or to whom the Company has made an inventory prepayment. Such write-downs would adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results in the period when the write-downs were recorded. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 34 The Company accrues for estimated cancellation fees related to inventory orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders in each case based on projected demand. Where appropriate, the purchases are applied to inventory component prepayments that are outstanding with the respective supplier. Purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products, a change in the Company’s product development plans, or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company accrues for the estimated cost of warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. The Company regularly reviews these estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities or the current installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of its reported operating results. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will record an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for asserted legal and other claims. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Apple Inc. | 2015 Form 10-K | 35 Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Overview and Highlights The Company designs, manufactures and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, accessories, networking solutions and third-party digital content and applications. The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party iPhone, iPad, Mac and iPod compatible products, including application software, and various accessories through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers; small and mid-sized businesses; and education, enterprise and government customers. Fiscal 2014 Highlights Net sales rose 7% or $11.9 billion during 2014 compared to 2013. This was driven by increases in net sales of iPhone; Mac; iTunes, Software and Services; and Accessories. Net sales and unit sales increased for iPhone primarily due to the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in the latter half of calendar year 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus beginning in the fourth quarter of 2014, and expanded distribution. Mac net sales and unit sales increased primarily due to strong demand for MacBook Air and MacBook Pro which were updated in 2014 with faster processors and offered at lower prices. Net sales of iTunes, Software and Services grew primarily due to increased revenue from sales through the App Store, AppleCare and licensing. Net sales and unit sales for iPad declined in 2014 compared to 2013 due to lower unit sales in many markets. Growth in total net sales during 2014 was also negatively impacted by the continuing decline of iPod sales. All of the Company’s operating segments other than the Rest of Asia Pacific segment experienced increased net sales in 2014, with growth being strongest in the Greater China and Japan operating segments. During the first quarter of 2014, the Company introduced iPad Air, its fifth generation iPad and iPad mini with Retina display. At its Worldwide Developer Conference in June 2014, the Company announced iOS 8 and OS X Yosemite. In September 2014, the Company introduced iPhone 6 and 6 Plus, released iOS 8, announced Apple Pay, which became available in the U.S. in October 2014, and previewed Apple Watch, which is expected to be available in early calendar 2015. In October 2014, the Company introduced iPad Air 2, iPad mini 3, iMac with Retina 5K Display and an updated Mac mini; and released OS X Yosemite. During 2014, the Company completed various business acquisitions, including the acquisitions of Beats Music, LLC, which offers a subscription streaming music service, and Beats Electronics, LLC, which makes Beats headphones, speakers and audio software. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 25 In April 2014, the Company increased its share repurchase authorization to $90 billion and the quarterly dividend was raised to $0.47 per common share, resulting in an overall increase in its capital return program from $100 billion to over $130 billion. During 2014, the Company utilized $45 billion to repurchase its common stock and paid dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.1 billion. The current share repurchase program is expected to be completed by the end of December 2015. The Company also issued $12.0 billion of long-term debt during 2014 with varying maturities through 2044 and launched a commercial paper program, with $6.3 billion outstanding as of September 27, 2014. Fiscal 2013 Highlights Net sales rose 9% or $14.4 billion during 2013 compared to 2012. This resulted from growth in net sales of iPhone; iTunes, Software and Services; and iPad. Growth in 2013 reflected strong sales of iPhone 5, strong continuing sales of iPhone 4 and 4s, the introduction of iPhone 5c and 5s, strong performance of the iPad mini and fourth generation iPad, and continued growth in the Company’s online sales of apps, digital content and services. Growth in these areas was partially offset by declines in net sales of Mac and iPod. All of the Company’s operating segments experienced increased net sales in 2013, with net sales growth being particularly strong in the Americas, Greater China and Japan operating segments. Growth in total net sales was higher during the first half of 2013, rising $12.6 billion or 14.7% over the same period in 2012. First half growth in 2013 was driven by iPhone and iPad introductions at or near the beginning of 2013. During the first quarter of 2013, the Company introduced the fourth generation iPad and iPad mini, a new MacBook Pro with Retina display, a new iPod touch, a new iMac, and expanded the rollout of iPhone 5 which began in September 2012. In June 2013 at its Worldwide Developer Conference, the Company announced iOS 7 and OS X Mavericks, announced iTunes Radio, introduced a significant upgrade to MacBook Air, and provided a preview of all new Mac Pro desktops that were introduced during 2014. In September 2013, the Company introduced iPhone 5s and iPhone 5c, released iOS 7, launched iTunes Radio, and announced that beginning in September 2013 iPhoto, iMovie and iWork Apps for iOS would be available as free downloads with all new iPhone, iPad and iPod touch devices (“iOS devices”). In April 2013, the Company announced a significant increase to its program to return capital to shareholders by raising the total amount it expected to utilize for the program through December 2015 to $100 billion. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization to $60 billion and raising its quarterly dividend to $0.44 per common share beginning in May 2013. During 2013, the Company utilized $23.0 billion to repurchase common shares and paid dividends of $10.5 billion or $1.64 per common share. In conjunction with its capital return program, in May 2013 the Company issued $17.0 billion of long-term debt with varying maturities through 2043. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 26 Sales Data The following table shows net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): (1) Includes deferrals and amortization of related non-software services and software upgrade rights. (2) Includes revenue from the iTunes Store, the App Store, the Mac App Store, the iBooks Store, AppleCare, licensing and other services. (3) Includes sales of Apple-branded and third-party accessories for iPhone, iPad, Mac and iPod. The Company’s fiscal year is the 52 or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company’s fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012 ended on September 27, 2014, September 28, 2013 and September 29, 2012, respectively. Both fiscal years 2014 and 2013 spanned 52 weeks. Fiscal year 2012 spanned 53 weeks, with a 14th week included in the first quarter of 2012, as is done approximately every six years to realign the Company’s fiscal quarters more closely to calendar quarters. Inclusion of the additional week in 2012 increased the Company’s overall net sales and operating expenses for the year. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 27 Product Performance iPhone The following table presents iPhone net sales and unit sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): The year-over-year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales in 2014 resulted primarily from the successful introduction of new iPhones in the latter half of calendar year 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus beginning in September 2014, and expanded distribution. iPhone unit sales grew in all of the Company’s operating segments, while iPhone net sales grew in all segments except Rest of Asia Pacific. Overall average selling prices (“ASPs”) for iPhone were relatively flat in 2014 compared to 2013, with growth in ASPs in the Americas and Retail segments being offset by a decline in ASPs in the Greater China, Japan and Rest of Asia Pacific segments. The growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales during 2013 resulted from increased demand for iPhone in all of the Company’s operating segments primarily due to the launch of iPhone 5 beginning in September 2012 and strong ongoing demand for iPhone 4 and 4s. All of the Company’s operating segments experienced increases in net sales and unit sales of iPhone during 2013 compared to 2012. The year-over-year impact of higher iPhone unit sales in 2013 was partially offset by a 3% decline in iPhone ASPs primarily as a result of a shift in product mix towards lower-priced iPhone models, particularly iPhone 4. All of the Company’s geographic operating segments experienced a decline in iPhone ASPs during 2013. iPad The following table presents iPad net sales and unit sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): Net sales and unit sales for iPad declined in 2014 compared to 2013. iPad net sales and unit sales grew in the Greater China and Japan segments but this growth was more than offset by a decline in all other segments. Overall iPad ASPs were relatively flat in 2014 compared to 2013 with a shift in mix to higher-priced iPads being offset by the October 2013 price reduction of iPad mini. ASPs increased in the Japan and Retail segments but were flat to slightly down in other segments. The growth in net sales and unit sales of iPad during 2013 resulted from growth in iPad unit sales in all of the Company’s operating segments. This growth was driven by the launch of iPad mini and the fourth generation iPad beginning in the first quarter of 2013. The year-over-year growth rate of total iPad unit sales was significantly higher than the growth rate of total iPad net sales for 2013 due to a reduction in iPad ASPs of 15% in 2013 compared to 2012. This decline resulted primarily from introduction of the lower priced iPad mini and the full year impact of the price reduction on iPad 2 made in 2012. The decline in iPad ASPs was experienced to various degrees by all of the Company’s operating segments. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 28 Mac The following table presents Mac net sales and unit sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales for 2014 was primarily driven by increased sales of MacBook Air, MacBook Pro and Mac Pro. Mac net sales and unit sales increased in all of the Company’s operating segments. Mac ASPs decreased during 2014 compared to 2013 primarily due to price reductions on certain Mac models and a shift in mix towards Mac portable systems. Mac net sales and unit sales for 2013 were down or relatively flat in all of the Company’s operating segments. Mac ASPs increased slightly partially offsetting the impact of lower unit sales on net sales. The decline in Mac unit sales and net sales reflected the overall weakness in the market for personal computers. iTunes, Software and Services The following table presents net sales information of iTunes, Software and Services for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions): The increase in net sales of iTunes, Software and Services in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to growth in net sales from the iTunes Store, AppleCare and licensing. The iTunes Store generated a total of $10.2 billion in net sales during 2014 compared to $9.3 billion during 2013. Growth in net sales from the iTunes Store was driven by increases in revenue from app sales reflecting continued growth in the installed base of iOS devices and the expanded offerings of iOS Apps and related in-App purchases. This was partially offset by a decline in sales of digital music. The increase in net sales of iTunes, Software and Services in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to growth in net sales from the iTunes Store, AppleCare and licensing. The iTunes Store generated a total of $9.3 billion in net sales during 2013, a 24% increase from 2012. Growth in the iTunes Store, which includes the App Store, the Mac App Store and the iBooks Store, reflected continued growth in the installed base of iOS devices, expanded offerings of iOS Apps and related in-App purchases, and expanded offerings of iTunes digital content. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. Accordingly, the Company determined its reportable operating segments, which are generally based on the nature and location of its customers, to be the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan, Rest of Asia Pacific and Retail. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. The Greater China segment includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and Asian countries, other than those countries included in the Company’s other operating segments. The results of the Company’s geographic segments do not include results of the Retail segment. Each operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 29 Americas The following table presents Americas net sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions): The growth in the Americas segment in 2014 was due to increased net sales of iPhone, Mac and iTunes, Software and Services that were partially offset by a decline in net sales of iPod and iPad and weakness in foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar compared to 2013. iPhone growth resulted primarily from the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in September 2013 and the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014. Mac growth was driven primarily by increased net sales and unit sales of MacBook Air and Mac Pro. The growth in the Americas segment net sales during 2013 was driven by increased sales of iPhone following the introduction of iPhone 5 in September 2012 and iPhone 5s and 5c in September 2013, increased sales from the iTunes Store, and increased sales of iPad, particularly iPad mini. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in net sales of iPod and Mac and a decline in iPad ASPs. Europe The following table presents Europe net sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions): The growth in the Europe segment in 2014 was due to increased net sales of iPhone, Mac and iTunes, Software and Services, as well as strength in European currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, partially offset by a decline in net sales of both iPad and iPod. iPhone growth resulted primarily from the successful introduction of iPhone 5s and 5c in the second half of calendar 2013 and the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in over 20 countries in Europe in September 2014. Mac growth was driven primarily by increased net sales and unit sales of MacBook Air, MacBook Pro and Mac Pro. The growth in net sales in the Europe segment during 2013 was primarily driven by increased sales of iPhone, iPad and higher net sales from iTunes. These increases were partially offset by decreases in net sales of Mac and iPod and a decline in iPad ASPs. Net sales in the Europe segment continued to be negatively impacted by unfavorable economic conditions in parts of the region reflected by second half 2013 net sales falling 4% compared to the second half of 2012, which followed an 11% increase in net sales during the first half of 2013. Greater China The following table presents Greater China net sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions): The Greater China segment experienced year-over-year growth in net sales in 2014 that was significantly higher than the growth rate for the Company overall. Greater China growth was driven by higher unit sales and net sales of all major product categories except iPod, in addition to higher net sales of iTunes, Software and Services. Growth in net sales and unit sales of iPhone was especially strong, driven by the successful launch of iPhone 5s and 5c in Mainland China and Hong Kong in September 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in Hong Kong in September 2014, increased demand for the Company’s entry-priced iPhones and the addition of a significant new carrier in the second quarter of 2014. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 30 The growth in net sales in the Greater China segment during 2013 resulted from two major iPhone introductions during the year, iPhone 5 in December 2012 and iPhone 5c and iPhone 5s in September 2013. Further contributing to the growth in 2013 was the introduction of the fourth generation iPad and iPad mini during the second quarter of 2013 and an increase in iPhone channel inventory as of the end of 2013 compared to the end of 2012. While net sales in the Greater China segment were up 13% for all of 2013, net sales for the second half of 2013 declined 4% compared to the second half of 2012. Japan The following table presents Japan net sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions): In 2014 the Japan segment generated year-over-year increases in net sales and unit sales of every major product category except iPod and experienced growth in net sales of iTunes, Software and Service. The year-over-year growth in iPhone was driven by the successful launch of iPhone 5s and 5c in September 2013, the successful launch of iPhone 6 and 6 Plus in September 2014, increased demand for the Company’s entry-priced iPhones and the addition of a significant new carrier in the fourth quarter of 2013. These positive factors were partially offset by weakness in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. The increase in net sales in the Japan segment during 2013 reflected significant increases in unit volumes of iPhone and iPad, strong growth of iTunes Store net sales and an increase in iPhone channel inventory as of the end of 2013 compared to the end of 2012. These positive factors were partially offset by declines in ASPs for iPhone and iPad and by weakness in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Rest of Asia Pacific The following table presents Rest of Asia Pacific net sales information for 2014, 2013 and 2012 (dollars in millions): Net sales in the Rest of Asia Pacific segment declined in 2014 compared to 2013 due to year-over-year reductions in net sales in all major product categories except Mac and reductions in unit sales of iPad and iPod. Net sales in 2014 were also negatively affected by the weakness in several foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, including the Australian dollar. The year-over-year growth in Rest of Asia Pacific segment net sales during 2013 was primarily driven by the launch of iPhone 5 and higher sales from the iTunes Store, partially offset by a decrease in net sales of iPad and Mac. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 31 Retail The following table presents Retail information for the years ended and as of September 27, 2014, September 28, 2013 and September 29, 2012 (dollars in millions): The growth in Retail segment net sales in 2014 was primarily driven by increases in net sales and unit sales of iPhone and Mac, partially offset by declines in net sales and unit sales of iPad and iPod. With an average of 424 and 403 open stores during 2014 and 2013, respectively, average revenue per store increased to $50.6 million in 2014 from $50.2 million in 2013. The growth in Retail segment net sales during 2013 was primarily driven by increased unit sales of iPhone and iPad following the new product introductions in the first half of 2013 and increased sales of services. With an average of 403 and 365 open stores during 2013 and 2012, respectively, average revenue per store decreased to $50.2 million in 2013, compared to $51.5 million in 2012. The Retail segment’s operating income was $4.6 billion, $4.0 billion and $4.6 billion during 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The year-over-year increase in Retail segment operating income in 2014 was attributable to higher net sales and higher gross margin primarily due to a higher mix of iPhone. The year-over-year decrease in Retail segment operating income in 2013 was primarily attributable to lower gross margin similar to that experienced by the Company overall, partially offset by higher net sales. Gross Margin Gross margin for 2014, 2013 and 2012 are as follows (dollars in millions): The year-over-year increase in the gross margin percentage in 2014 was driven by multiple factors including lower commodity costs, a favorable shift in mix to products with higher margins and improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales, which was partially offset by the weakness in several foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, price reductions on select products and higher cost structures on certain new products. The year-over-year decrease in gross margin in 2013 compared to 2012 was driven by multiple factors including introduction of new versions of existing products with higher cost structures and flat or reduced pricing; a shift in sales mix to products with lower margins; introduction of iPad mini with gross margin significantly below the Company’s average product margins; higher expenses associated with changes to certain of the Company’s service policies and other warranty costs; price reductions on certain products, including iPad 2 and iPhone 4; and unfavorable impact from foreign exchange fluctuations. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 32 The Company anticipates gross margin during the first quarter of 2015 to be between 37.5% and 38.5%. The foregoing statement regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage in the first quarter of 2015 is forward-looking and could differ from actual results. The Company’s future gross margins can be impacted by multiple factors including, but not limited to those set forth above in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors” and those described in this paragraph. In general, the Company believes gross margins will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions, potential increases in the cost of components and potential strengthening of the U.S. dollar, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2014, 2013 and 2012 are as follows (dollars in millions): Research and Development (“R&D”) Expense The year-over-year growth in 2014 and 2013 R&D expense was driven primarily by an increase in headcount and related expenses, including share-based compensation costs and machinery and equipment to support expanded R&D activities. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to make further investments in R&D to remain competitive. Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expense The growth in SG&A expense during 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to increased headcount and related expenses, including share-based compensation costs; higher spending on marketing, advertising and professional services; and the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment. The growth in SG&A during 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment and increased headcount and related expenses, partially offset by decreased spending on professional services. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 33 Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for 2014, 2013 and 2012 are as follows (dollars in millions): The decrease in other income and expense during 2014 compared to 2013 was due primarily to higher interest expense on debt and higher expenses associated with foreign exchange rate movements, partially offset by lower premium expenses on foreign exchange contracts and higher interest income. The year-over-year increase in other income and expense during 2013 was due primarily to higher interest and dividend income resulting from the Company’s higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances and lower premium expenses on foreign exchange contracts, partially offset by interest expense on debt issued in the third quarter of 2013 and higher expenses associated with foreign exchange rate movements. The weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.11%, 1.03% and 1.03% during 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The Company had no debt outstanding during 2012 and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense. Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2014, 2013 and 2012 are as follows (dollars in millions): The Company’s effective tax rates for all years differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings, a substantial portion of which was generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. As of September 27, 2014, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses and tax credits of $5.1 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $20.3 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and the amount of a valuation allowance. During the fiscal year ended September 27, 2014, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) concluded its review of the years 2004 through 2009. The IRS is currently examining the years 2010 through 2012. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”), which amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition. ASU 2014-09 is based on principles that govern the recognition of revenue at an amount an entity expects to be entitled when products are transferred to customers. ASU 2014-09 will be effective for the Company beginning in its first quarter of 2018. Early adoption is not permitted. The new revenue standard may be applied retrospectively to each prior period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect recognized as of the date of adoption. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of adopting the new revenue standard on its consolidated financial statements. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 34 Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 27, 2014, September 28, 2013 and September 29, 2012 (in millions): The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. To provide additional flexibility in managing liquidity, the Company began accessing the commercial paper markets in the third quarter of 2014. The Company currently anticipates the cash used for future dividends and the share repurchase program will come from its current domestic cash, cash generated from on-going U.S. operating activities and from borrowings. As of September 27, 2014 and September 28, 2013, $137.1 billion and $111.3 billion, respectively, of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly-rated securities and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy requires investments generally to be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. During 2014, cash generated from operating activities of $59.7 billion was a result of $39.5 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $13.2 billion and an increase in net change in operating assets and liabilities of $7.0 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $22.6 billion during 2014 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $9.0 billion; cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $9.6 billion; and cash paid for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $3.8 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $37.5 billion during 2014 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $45.0 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $11.1 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and commercial paper of $12.0 billion and $6.3 billion, respectively. During 2013, cash generated from operating activities of $53.7 billion was a result of $37.0 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $10.2 billion and an increase in net change in operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $33.8 billion during 2013 consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $24.0 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $8.2 billion. Cash used in financing activities of $16.4 billion during 2013 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $22.9 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalents of $10.6 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $16.9 billion. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 35 Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $11.0 billion during 2014, consisting of $491 million for retail store facilities and $10.5 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment and other corporate facilities and infrastructure. The Company’s actual cash payments for capital expenditures during 2014 were $9.6 billion. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $13.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2015, including approximately $600 million for retail store facilities and approximately $12.4 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, data centers and corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements. During 2015, the Company expects to open about 25 new retail stores, with approximately three-quarters located outside of the U.S. During 2015, the Company also expects to remodel approximately five of its existing stores. Debt In April 2014, the Board of Directors authorized the Company to issue unsecured short-term promissory notes (“Commercial Paper”) pursuant to a commercial paper program. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the commercial paper program for general corporate purposes, including dividends and share repurchases. As of September 27, 2014, the Company had $6.3 billion of Commercial Paper outstanding, with a weighted-average interest rate of 0.12% and maturities generally less than nine months. In the third quarter of 2014 and 2013, the Company issued $12.0 billion and $17.0 billion of long-term debt, respectively. The debt issuances included floating- and fixed-rate notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $29.0 billion (collectively the “Notes”). The Company has entered, and may enter in the future, into interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk on the Notes. Interest rate swaps allow the Company to effectively convert fixed-rate payments into floating-rate payments or floating-rate payments into fixed-rate payments. In the third quarter of 2014, the Company entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of $9.0 billion, which effectively converted most of the fixed-rate notes into floating-rate notes, and in the third quarter of 2013, the Company entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of $3.0 billion, which effectively converted the floating-rate notes into fixed-rate notes. Capital Return Program In April 2014, the Company’s Board of Directors increased the share repurchase program authorization from $60 billion to $90 billion of the Company’s common stock, of which $67.9 billion had been utilized as of September 27, 2014. The share repurchase program is expected to be completed by the end of December 2015. The Company’s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 36 The increase to the Company’s share repurchase program authorization resulted in a total capital return program of over $130 billion. The Company expects to complete the capital return program by the end of December 2015 by paying dividends and dividend equivalents, repurchasing shares and remitting withheld taxes related to net share settlement of restricted stock units. To assist in funding its capital return program, the Company expects to access the debt markets, both domestically and internationally. The following table presents the Company’s dividends, dividend equivalents, share repurchases and net share settlement activity from the start of the capital return program in August 2012 through September 2014 (in millions): Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company, or engages in leasing, hedging, or R&D services with the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 27, 2014, and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for long-term debt (in millions): Operating Leases The Company’s major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally contain multi-year renewal options. Leases for retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. As of September 27, 2014, the Company’s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were $5.0 billion, of which $3.6 billion related to leases for retail space. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 37 Purchase Commitments The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts and open orders based on projected demand information. Where appropriate, the purchases are applied to inventory component prepayments that are outstanding with the respective supplier. Other Obligations The Company’s other obligations were comprised mainly of commitments to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment and commitments related to advertising, R&D, Internet and telecommunications services and other obligations. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 27, 2014, the Company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $20.3 billion. Additionally, as of September 27, 2014, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $4.0 billion and an additional $630 million for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified third-party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or application software for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights. The Company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of September 27, 2014 or September 28, 2013. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations and payments made under these agreements historically have not been material. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 38 Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, accessories, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title, risk of loss and rewards of ownership have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software and/or undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For sales of qualifying versions of iOS devices, Mac and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades and features free of charge to customers. The Company also provides various non-software services to owners of qualifying versions of iOS devices and Mac. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services based on the Company’s ESPs is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided for each of these devices, which ranges from two to four years. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 39 The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the unspecified software upgrade rights offered, the estimated value of unspecified software upgrade rights, the estimated or actual costs incurred to provide non-software services and the estimated period software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company’s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment on whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security. Inventory Valuation and Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimated Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments and has invested in manufacturing process equipment, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities. In addition, the Company has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory components. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels and component cost trends. The Company also reviews its manufacturing-related capital assets and inventory prepayments for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that an asset is not recoverable, it records an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value of such an asset exceeds its fair value. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 40 The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. In certain circumstances the Company may be required to record additional write-downs of inventory, inventory prepayments and/or manufacturing-related capital assets. These circumstances include future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products being less favorable than forecasted, unforeseen technological changes or changes to the Company’s product development plans that negatively impact the utility of any of these assets, or significant deterioration in the financial condition of one or more of the Company’s suppliers that hold any of the Company’s manufacturing process equipment or to whom the Company has made an inventory prepayment. Such write-downs would adversely affect the Company’s results of operations in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company records accruals for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts and open orders in each case based on projected demand. Where appropriate, the purchases are applied to inventory component prepayments that are outstanding with the respective supplier. Purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products, if the Company’s product development plans change, or if there is an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, then the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost of warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company re-evaluates these estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect the Company’s results of operations. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Apple Inc. | 2014 Form 10-K | 41 Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for legal and other contingencies. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Overview and Highlights The Company designs, manufactures, and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, networking solutions, and third-party digital content and applications. The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party iPhone, iPad, Mac and iPod compatible products, including application software, and various accessories through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers; small and mid-sized businesses; and education, enterprise and government customers. Fiscal 2013 Highlights Net sales rose 9% or $14.4 billion during 2013 compared to 2012. This resulted from growth in net sales of iPhone; iTunes, software, and services; and iPad. Growth in 2013 reflects strong sales of iPhone 5, strong continuing sales of iPhone 4 and 4s, the introduction of iPhone 5c and 5s, strong performance of the iPad Mini and fourth generation iPad, and continued growth in the Company’s online sales of apps, digital content, and services. Growth in these areas was partially offset by declines in net sales of Mac and iPod. All of the Company’s operating segments experienced increased net sales in 2013, with net sales growth being particularly strong in the Americas, Greater China and Japan operating segments. Similar to 2012, growth in total net sales was higher during the first half of 2013, rising $12.6 billion or 14.7% over the same period in 2012. First half growth in 2013 was driven by iPhone and iPad introductions at or near the beginning of 2013. During the first quarter of 2013, the Company introduced the fourth generation iPad and iPad Mini, a new MacBook Pro with Retina display, a new iPod touch, a new iMac, and expanded the rollout of iPhone 5 which began in September 2012. In June 2013 at its Worldwide Developer Conference, the Company announced iOS 7 and OS X Mavericks, announced iTunes Radio, introduced a significant upgrade to MacBook Air, and provided a preview of all new Mac Pro desktops expected to be introduced during 2014. In September 2013, the Company introduced iPhone 5s and iPhone 5c, released iOS 7, launched iTunes Radio, and announced that beginning in September 2013 iPhoto, iMovie and iWork apps for iOS would be available as free downloads with all new “iOS devices,” namely iPhone, iPad and iPod touch. In October 2013, the Company announced iPad Air™, its fifth generation iPad, and iPad mini with Retina display. In April 2013 the Company announced a significant increase to its program to return capital to shareholders by raising the total amount it expected to utilize for the program through December 2015 to $100 billion. This included increasing its share repurchase authorization to $60 billion and raising its quarterly dividend to $3.05 per common share beginning in May 2013. During 2013, the Company utilized $23.0 billion to repurchase common shares and paid dividends of $10.5 billion or $11.40 per common share. In conjunction with its capital return program, in May 2013 the Company issued $17.0 billion of notes with varying maturities through 2043. Fiscal 2012 Highlights Overall net sales during 2012 increased $48.3 billion or 45% compared to 2011. All of the Company’s operating segments experienced increased net sales during 2012, primarily a result of strong demand for iPhone and iPad. Growth in total net sales was particularly strong during the first six months of 2012, rising $34.1 billion or 66% compared to the same period in 2011. The net sales growth during the first six months of 2012 reflected the launch of iPhone 4s in the first quarter of 2012 and the Company’s ability to meet demand more quickly for iPhone 4s when compared to the iPhone 4 launch. Growth during the first half of 2012 was also favorably impacted by strong unit sales of iPad during the holiday season, resulting in a 111% increase in iPad unit sales during the first quarter of 2012 compared to the same quarter in 2011. Partially offsetting these positive factors was a decrease in iPod net sales experienced across all operating segments. In October 2011, the Company introduced iPhone 4s and launched iCloud, the Company’s cloud service that stores user data and keeps it up to date and available on multiple iOS devices and Mac and Windows personal computers. The Company introduced the third generation iPad with Retina display in March 2012 and in June 2012 introduced the MacBook Pro with Retina display and an updated MacBook Air During the fourth quarter of 2012, OS X Mountain Lion was released and iPhone 5 was introduced. In March 2012, the Company announced a $10 billion share repurchase program that would be executed over three years and announced plans to initiate a quarterly dividend commencing in the fourth quarter of 2012. During the fourth quarter, the Company paid dividends of $2.5 billion or $2.65 per common share. Sales Data The following table shows net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during 2013, 2012 and 2011 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): (a) Greater China includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. (b) Includes deferrals and amortization of related non-software services and software upgrade rights. (c) Includes revenue from sales on the iTunes Store, the App Store, the Mac App Store, and the iBooks Store, and revenue from sales of AppleCare, licensing and other services. (d) Includes sales of hardware peripherals and Apple-branded and third-party accessories for iPhone, iPad, Mac and iPod. The Company’s fiscal year is the 52 or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company’s fiscal years 2013, 2012 and 2011 ended on September 28, 2013, September 29, 2012 and September 24, 2011, respectively. Both fiscal years 2013 and 2011 spanned 52 weeks. Fiscal year 2012 spanned 53 weeks, with a 14th week added to the first quarter of 2012, as is done approximately every six years to realign the Company’s fiscal quarters more closely to calendar quarters. Inclusion of the additional week in 2012 increased the Company’s overall net sales and operating expenses for the year. Product Performance iPhone The following table presents iPhone net sales and unit sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (net sales in millions and units in thousands): The growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales during 2013 resulted from increased demand for iPhone in all of the Company’s operating segments primarily due to the launch of iPhone 5 beginning in September 2012 and strong ongoing demand for iPhone 4 and 4s. All of the Company’s operating segments experienced increases in net sales and unit sales of iPhone during 2013 compared to 2012. The year-over-year impact of higher iPhone unit sales in 2013 was partially offset by a 3% decline in iPhone average selling prices (“ASPs”) in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily as a result of a shift in product mix towards lower-priced iPhone models, particularly iPhone 4. All of the Company’s geographic operating segments experienced a decline in iPhone ASPs during 2013. The year-over-year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales during 2012 reflects strong demand for iPhone in all of the Company’s operating segments, except for the Rest of Asia Pacific segment. Growth in iPhone sales during 2012 is primarily a result of the launches of iPhone 4s in the first quarter of 2012 and iPhone 5 in the fourth quarter of 2012, ongoing demand during 2012 for iPhone 4 and iPhone 3GS, and expanded distribution with new carriers and resellers. iPad The following table presents iPad net sales and unit sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (net sales in millions and units in thousands): The growth in net sales and unit sales of iPad during 2013 resulted from growth in iPad unit sales in all of the Company’s operating segments. This growth was driven by the launch of iPad mini and the fourth generation iPad beginning in the first quarter of 2013. The year-over-year growth rate of total iPad unit sales was significantly higher than the growth rate of total iPad net sales for 2013 due to a reduction in iPad ASPs of 15% in 2013 compared to 2012. This decline resulted primarily from introduction of the lower priced iPad mini and the full year impact of the price reduction on iPad 2 made in 2012. The decline in iPad ASPs was experienced to various degrees by all of the Company’s operating segments. The year-over-year increase in iPad net sales and unit sales during 2012 was driven by strong demand for iPad in all of the Company’s operating segments as a result of the launch of the third generation iPad in March 2012, continued demand for iPad 2, and expanded distribution with new resellers. The year-over-year growth rate of iPad unit sales was higher than the growth rate of iPad net sales during 2012 due to a 10% reduction in ASPs as a result of a shift in product mix toward lower-priced iPad models, a price reduction on iPad 2 and an increase in indirect sales due to expanded distribution through third-party resellers. Mac The following table presents Mac net sales and unit sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (net sales in millions and units in thousands): Mac net sales and unit sales for 2013 were down or relatively flat in all of the Company’s operating segments. Mac ASPs increased slightly partially offsetting the impact of lower unit sales on net sales. The decline in Mac unit sales and net sales reflects the overall weakness in the market for personal computers. The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales during 2012 reflects increased demand for Mac portables in all of the Company’s operating segments driven by 2012 releases of updated models of MacBook Air and MacBook Pro, including MacBook Pro with Retina display in June 2012. Partially offsetting the increase in net sales of Mac portables was a decline in net sales of Mac desktops that reflected the overall decline in the market for desktop personal computers during 2012. Additionally, the Company did not introduce updated versions of its Mac desktop products in 2012. iTunes, Software and Services The following table presents net sales information of iTunes, software and services for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (in millions): The increase in net sales of iTunes, software and services in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to growth in net sales from the iTunes Store, AppleCare and licensing. The iTunes Store generated a total of $9.3 billion in net sales during 2013, a 24% increase from 2012. Growth in the iTunes Store, which includes the App Store, the Mac App Store and the iBooks Store, reflects continued growth in the installed base of iOS devices, expanded offerings of iOS apps and related in-App purchases, and expanded offerings of iTunes digital content. The increase in net sales of iTunes, software and services in 2012 compared to 2011 was due primarily to growth of the iTunes Store, which generated total net sales of $7.5 billion for 2012 compared to net sales of $5.4 billion during 2011. The strong results of the iTunes Store in 2012 reflect growth of the App Store; growth of the Company’s customer base; and the continued expansion of third-party audio, video and book content available for sale or rent via the iTunes Store. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. Accordingly, the Company determined its reportable operating segments, which are generally based on the nature and location of its customers, to be the Americas, Europe, Greater China, Japan, Rest of Asia Pacific and Retail. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as India, the Middle East and Africa. The Greater China segment includes China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and Asian countries, other than those countries included in the Company’s other operating segments. The Retail segment operates Apple retail stores in 13 countries, including the U.S. The results of the Company’s geographic segments do not include results of the Retail segment. Each operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Americas The following table presents Americas net sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (in millions): The growth in the Americas segment net sales during 2013 was driven by increased sales of iPhone following the introduction of iPhone 5 in September 2012 and iPhone 5s and 5c in September 2013, increased sales from the iTunes Store, and increased sales of iPad, particularly iPad mini. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in net sales of iPod and Mac and a decline in iPad ASPs. The growth in net sales during 2012 was primarily driven by increased demand for iPhone following the launches of iPhone 4s and iPhone 5, strong demand for the third generation iPad and iPad 2, and higher sales from the iTunes Store. Europe The following table presents Europe net sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (in millions): Similar to the Americas segment, growth in net sales in the Europe segment during 2013 was primarily driven by increased sales of iPhone, iPad and higher net sales from iTunes. These increases were partially offset by decreases in net sales of Mac and iPod and a decline in iPad ASPs. Net sales in the Europe segment continue to be negatively impacted by unfavorable economic conditions in parts of the region reflected by second half 2013 net sales falling 4% compared to the second half of 2012, which followed an 11% increase in net sales during the first half of 2013. The growth in net sales during 2012 was primarily driven by strong demand for the third generation iPad and iPad 2, higher sales from the iTunes Store and increased demand for iPhone from the launch of iPhone 4s. iPhone 5 was launched in a limited number of countries in the Europe segment at the end of the fourth quarter of 2012 and did not contribute to the growth in net sales in the Europe segment to the extent it did in other segments. Lower year-over-year growth in net sales in the Europe segment during 2012 compared to the Company’s other geographic segments reflects growth in iPhone unit sales that was well below the growth rates experienced by the Company’s other operating segments, partially offset by strong growth in iPad unit sales. Net sales in the Europe segment were also negatively impacted by the region’s uncertain economic conditions and the strength in the U.S. dollar relative to several European currencies, including the euro. Greater China The following table presents Greater China net sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (in millions): The growth in net sales in the Greater China segment during 2013 resulted from two major iPhone introductions during the year, iPhone 5 in December 2012 and iPhone 5c and iPhone 5s in September 2013. Further contributing to the growth in 2013 was the introduction of the fourth generation iPad and iPad mini during the second quarter of 2013 and an increase in iPhone channel inventory as of the end of 2013 compared to the end of 2012. While net sales in the China segment were up 13% for all of 2013, net sales for the second half of 2013 declined 4% compared to the second half of 2012. The growth in net sales during 2012 was mainly due to increased demand for iPhone following the launch of iPhone 4s and strong demand for the third generation iPad and iPad 2. Growth in the Greater China segment was affected by the timing of iPhone and iPad product launches. iPhone 5 was not launched in China during 2012, and the third generation iPad that was introduced by the Company in March 2012 was not launched in China until the fourth quarter of 2012. Japan The following table presents Japan net sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (in millions): The increase in net sales in the Japan segment during 2013 reflects significant increases in unit volumes of iPhone and iPad, strong growth of iTunes Store net sales and an increase in iPhone channel inventory as of the end of 2013 compared to the end of 2012. These positive factors were partially offset by declines in ASPs for iPhone and iPad and by weakness in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. The growth in net sales during 2012 was primarily driven by increased demand for iPhone following the launches of iPhone 4s and iPhone 5, expanded distribution with a new iPhone carrier, strong demand for the third generation iPad and iPad 2, higher sales from the iTunes Store, and strength in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. Rest of Asia Pacific The following table presents Rest of Asia Pacific net sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (in millions): The growth in net sales during 2013 was primarily driven by the launch of iPhone 5 and higher sales from iTunes, partially offset by a decrease in net sales of iPad and Mac. The growth in net sales during 2012 was mainly due to strong demand for the third generation iPad. The Rest of Asia Pacific segment experienced significantly lower year-over-year growth in net sales compared to all of the Company’s other operating segments due primarily to a decrease in iPhone sales. This decrease reflects the timing of iPhone 5 launches in the Rest of Asia Pacific segment, which only occurred in a limited number of countries during the fourth quarter of 2012. Retail The following table presents Retail net sales information for 2013, 2012 and 2011 (in millions, except for store counts): The growth in net sales during 2013 was primarily driven by increased unit sales of iPhone and iPad following the new product introductions in the first half of 2013 and increased sales of services. With an average of 403 and 365 open stores during 2013 and 2012, respectively, average revenue per store decreased to $50.2 million in 2013, compared to $51.5 million in 2012. The growth in net sales during 2012 was driven primarily by increased demand for iPhone following the launches of iPhone 4s and iPhone 5, strong demand for the third generation iPad and iPad 2, and higher Mac net sales. Lower year-over-year growth in net sales in the Retail segment during 2012 compared to the Company’s other segments reflects the significant growth in iPad indirect distribution channel expansion. With an average of 365 stores and 326 stores during 2012 and 2011, respectively, average revenue per store increased 19% to $51.5 million in 2012 compared to $43.3 million in 2011. The Retail segment’s operating income was $4.0 billion, $4.6 billion and $3.1 billion during 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively. The year-over-year decrease in Retail operating income in 2013 is primarily attributable to lower gross margin similar to that experienced by the Company overall, partially offset by higher net sales. The year-over-year increase in Retail operating income in 2012 is primarily attributable to higher overall net sales that resulted in significantly higher average revenue per store during 2012. Gross Margin Gross margin for 2013, 2012 and 2011 are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): The gross margin percentage in 2013 was 37.6% compared to 43.9% in 2012. The year-over-year decrease in gross margin in 2013 compared to 2012 was driven by multiple factors including introduction of new versions of existing products with higher cost structures and flat or reduced pricing; a shift in sales mix to products with lower margins; introduction of iPad mini with gross margin significantly below the Company’s average product margins; higher expenses associated with changes to certain of the Company’s service policies and other warranty costs; price reductions on certain products, including iPad 2 and iPhone 4; and unfavorable impact from foreign exchange fluctuations. The gross margin percentage in 2012 was 43.9%, compared to 40.5% in 2011. This year-over-year increase in gross margin was largely driven by lower commodity and other product costs, a higher mix of iPhone sales, and improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales. The increase in gross margin was partially offset by the impact of a stronger U.S. dollar. The gross margin percentage during the first half of 2012 was 45.9% compared to 41.4% during the second half of 2012. The primary drivers of higher gross margin in the first half of 2012 compared to the second half are a higher mix of iPhone sales and improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales. Additionally, gross margin in the second half of 2012 was also affected by the introduction of new products with flat pricing that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers, price reductions on certain existing products, higher transition costs associated with product launches, and continued strengthening of the U.S. dollar; partially offset by lower commodity costs. The Company anticipates gross margin during the first quarter of 2014 to be between 36.5% and 37.5%. The foregoing statement regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage in the first quarter of 2014 is forward-looking and could differ from actual results. The Company’s future gross margin can be impacted by multiple factors including, but not limited to those set forth above in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors” and those described in this paragraph. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions, potential increases in the cost of components, and potential strengthening of the U.S. dollar, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2013, 2012 and 2011 are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development (“R&D”) Expense The growth in R&D expense was driven by an increase in headcount and related expenses to support expanded R&D activities. Although total R&D expense increased 32% and 39% in 2013 and 2012, respectively, it remained fairly consistent as a percentage of net sales. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to make further investments in R&D to remain competitive. Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expense The growth in SG&A during 2013 was primarily due to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment and increased headcount and related expenses, partially offset by decreased spending on professional services. The growth in SG&A during 2012 was primarily due to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment, increased headcount and related expenses, higher spending on professional services, marketing and advertising programs, and increased variable costs associated with the overall growth of the Company’s net sales. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for 2013, 2012 and 2011 are as follows (in millions): The year-over-year increase in other income and expense during 2013 was due primarily to higher interest and dividend income resulting from the Company’s higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances and lower premium expenses on foreign exchange contracts, partially offset by interest expense on debt issued in the third quarter of 2013 and remeasurement losses from foreign exchange rate movements. The overall increase in other income and expense in 2012 compared to 2011 was attributable to higher interest and dividend income on the Company’s higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, partially offset by higher premium expenses on foreign exchange contracts. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.03% during 2013 and 2012 and 0.77% during 2011. The Company had no debt outstanding during 2012 and 2011 and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense. Provision for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes and effective tax rates for 2013, 2012 and 2011 are as follows (in millions): The Company’s effective tax rates for all periods differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings, a substantial portion of which was generated by subsidiaries organized in Ireland, for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. As of September 28, 2013, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $4.2 billion, and deferred tax liabilities of $16.5 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of a valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for the years 2004 through 2006 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company has contested certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. The IRS is currently examining the years 2007 through 2012. All IRS audit issues for years prior to 2004 have been resolved. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 28, 2013, September 29, 2012 and September 24, 2011 (in millions): The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. The Company anticipates the cash used for future dividends and the share repurchase program will come from its current domestic cash, cash generated from on-going U.S. operating activities and from borrowings. As of September 28, 2013 and September 29, 2012, $111.3 billion and $82.6 billion, respectively, of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly-rated securities and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy requires investments generally to be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. During 2013, cash generated from operating activities of $53.7 billion was a result of $37.0 billion of net income, non-cash adjustments to net income of $10.2 billion and an increase in net change in operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 billion. Cash used in investing activities of $33.8 billion during 2013 consisted primarily of net purchases, sales and maturities of marketable securities of $24.0 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $8.2 billion. Cash used in financing activities during 2013 consisted primarily of cash used to repurchase common stock of $22.9 billion and cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalent rights of $10.6 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $16.9 billion. During 2012, cash generated from operating activities of $50.9 billion was a result of $41.7 billion of net income and non-cash adjustments to net income of $9.4 billion, partially offset by a decrease in net operating assets and liabilities of $299 million. Cash used in investing activities during 2012 of $48.2 billion consisted primarily of net purchases, sales and maturities of marketable securities of $38.4 billion and cash used to acquire property, plant and equipment of $8.3 billion. Cash used in financing activities during 2012 of $1.7 billion consisted primarily of cash used to pay dividends and dividend equivalent rights of $2.5 billion. Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $7.0 billion during 2013, consisting of $499 million for retail store facilities and $6.5 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and other corporate facilities and infrastructure. The Company’s actual cash payments for capital expenditures during 2013 were $8.2 billion. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $11.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2014, including approximately $550 million for retail store facilities and approximately $10.5 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements. During 2014, the Company expects to open about 30 new retail stores, with approximately two-thirds located outside of the U.S. During 2014, the Company also expects to remodel approximately 20 of its existing stores. Long-Term Debt In the third quarter of 2013, the Company issued $17.0 billion of long-term debt, which included $3.0 billion of floating-rate notes. To manage the risk of adverse fluctuations in interest rates associated with the floating-rate notes, the Company entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of $3.0 billion, which, in effect, fixed the interest rate of the floating-rate notes. Of the aggregate principal amount of $17.0 billion, $2.5 billion is due in 2016 and $14.5 billion is due in 2018 through 2043. Dividend and Stock Repurchase Program In the third quarter of 2013, the Company raised its cash dividend by 15% to $3.05 per common share. The Company expects to continue to pay quarterly dividends of $3.05 per common share each quarter, subject to declaration by the Board of Directors. In 2012, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a program to repurchase up to $10 billion of the Company’s common stock. In April 2013, the Company’s Board of Directors increased the share repurchase program authorization from $10 billion to $60 billion, of which $23.0 billion had been utilized as of September 28, 2013. The share repurchase program is expected to be completed by December 2015. The Company’s share repurchase program does not obligate it to acquire any specific number of shares. Under the program, shares may be repurchased in privately negotiated or open market transactions, including under plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 of the Exchange Act. Beginning in August 2012 through December 2015, the Company anticipates it will utilize approximately $100 billion to pay dividends and dividend equivalent rights, repurchase shares, and remit withheld taxes related to net share settlement of restricted stock units, of which $37.1 billion had been utilized through September 28, 2013. The following table presents the Company’s dividends, share repurchases and net share settlement activity for 2013 and 2012 since the start of the program (in millions): Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 28, 2013 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, except for long-term debt (in millions): Lease Commitments The Company’s major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms not exceeding five additional years. Leases for retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. As of September 28, 2013, the Company’s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were $4.7 billion, of which $3.5 billion related to leases for retail space. Purchase Commitments with Outsourcing Partners and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Where appropriate, the purchases are applied to inventory component prepayments that are outstanding with the respective supplier. As of September 28, 2013, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of $18.6 billion. Other Obligations In addition to the off-balance sheet commitments mentioned above, the Company had outstanding obligations of $1.3 billion as of September 28, 2013, that consisted mainly of commitments to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to advertising, research and development, Internet and telecommunications services and other obligations. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 28, 2013, the Company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $16.5 billion. Additionally, as of September 28, 2013, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $2.7 billion and an additional $590 million for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified third-party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or application software for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights. The Company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of September 28, 2013 or September 29, 2012. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations, and payments made under these agreements historically have not been material. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and valuation of manufacturing-related assets and estimated purchase commitment cancellation fees, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software, and/or undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For sales of qualifying versions of iOS devices, Mac and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades and features free of charge to customers. The Company also provides various non-software services to owners of qualifying versions of iOS devices and Mac. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services based on the Company’s ESPs is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided for each of these devices, which ranges from two to four years. The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. Should future facts and circumstances change, the Company’s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. Factors subject to change include the unspecified software upgrade rights offered, the estimated value of unspecified software upgrade rights, the estimated or actual costs incurred to provide non-software services, and the estimated period software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company’s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment on whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security. Inventory Valuation and Valuation of Manufacturing-Related Assets and Estimated Purchase Commitment Cancellation Fees The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments and has invested in manufacturing process equipment, including capital assets held at its suppliers’ facilities. In addition, the Company has made prepayments to certain of its suppliers associated with long-term supply agreements to secure supply of inventory components. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The Company also reviews its manufacturing-related capital assets and inventory prepayments for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the Company determines that an asset is not recoverable, it records an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value of such an asset exceeds its fair value. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. In certain circumstances the Company may be required to record additional write-downs of inventory, inventory prepayments and/or manufacturing-related capital assets. These circumstances include future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products being less favorable than forecasted, unforeseen technological changes or changes to the Company’s product development plans that negatively impact the utility of any of these assets, or significant deterioration in the financial condition of one or more of the Company’s suppliers that hold any of the Company’s manufacturing process equipment or to whom the Company has made an inventory prepayment. Such write-downs would adversely affect the Company’s results of operations in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company records accruals for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders in each case based on projected demand. Where appropriate, the purchases are applied to inventory component prepayments that are outstanding with the respective supplier. Purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products, if the Company’s product development plans change, or if there is an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, then the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost of warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates these estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect the Company’s results of operations. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 10, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for legal and other contingencies. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years or quarters refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. Each of the terms the “Company” and “Apple” as used herein refers collectively to Apple Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise stated. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, networking solutions, and third-party digital content and applications. The Company’s products and services include iPhone, iPad, Mac, iPod, Apple TV, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the iOS and OS X operating systems, iCloud, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company also sells and delivers digital content and applications through the iTunes Store, App Store, iBookstore, and Mac App Store. The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party iPhone, iPad, Mac and iPod compatible products, including application software, and various accessories through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers; small and mid-sized businesses; and education, enterprise and government customers. The Company is committed to bringing the best user experience to its customers through its innovative hardware, software, peripherals, and services. The Company’s business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating systems, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative design. As part of its strategy, the Company continues to expand its platform for the discovery and delivery of third-party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store. As part of the iTunes Store, the Company’s App Store and iBookstore allow customers to discover and download applications and books through either a Mac or Windows-based computer or through “iOS devices,” namely iPhone, iPad and iPod touch. The Company’s Mac App Store allows customers to easily discover, download and install Mac applications. The Company also supports a community for the development of third-party software and hardware products and digital content that complement the Company’s offerings. The Company’s strategy also includes expanding its distribution network to effectively reach more customers and provide them with a high-quality sales and post-sales support experience. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including the market for mobile communications and media devices with its iOS devices; personal computers with its Mac computers; portable digital players with iPod; and distribution of third-party digital content and applications with the iTunes Store, App Store, iBookstore, and Mac App Store. While the Company is widely recognized as a leading innovator in the markets where it competes, these markets are highly competitive and subject to aggressive pricing. To remain competitive, the Company believes that continual investment in research and development and marketing and advertising is critical to the development and sale of innovative products and technologies. The Company’s research and development spending is focused on investing in new hardware and software products, and in further developing its existing products, including iPhone, iPad, Mac, and iPod hardware; iOS and OS X operating systems; and a variety of application software and online services. The Company uses a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels, such as its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, and third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware and software integration, and demonstrate the unique solutions that are available on its products. The Company further believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its products over those of its competitors and providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by expanding the number of its own retail stores worldwide. Additionally, the Company has invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality Apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third-party reseller locations. Through the Apple Premium Reseller Program, certain third-party resellers focus on the Apple platform by providing a high level of integration and support services, and product expertise. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software, and/or undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For sales of qualifying versions of iOS devices, Mac and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time to time provide future unspecified software upgrades and features free of charge to customers. The Company also provides various non-software services to owners of qualifying versions of iOS devices and Mac. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Revenue allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services based on the Company’s ESPs is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided for each of these devices, which ranges from two to four years. The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment and considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. If the facts and circumstances underlying the factors considered change, including the estimated or actual costs incurred to provide non-software services or the estimated period the software upgrades and non-software services are expected to be provided, or should future facts and circumstances lead the Company to consider additional factors, the Company’s ESPs and the future rate of related amortization for software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and other customer incentive programs. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For the Company’s other customer incentive programs, the estimated cost is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs that could result in reductions to future revenue. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeems such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have an adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of the its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment on whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs, which would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company records accruals for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company’s requirements for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would adversely affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost of hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect the Company’s results of operations. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 7, “Commitments and Contingencies,” the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims, including those that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies for legal and other contingencies. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company is subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in a reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements for that reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Fiscal Period The Company’s fiscal year is the 52 or 53-week period that ends on the last Saturday of September. The Company’s fiscal years 2012, 2011 and 2010 ended on September 29, 2012, September 24, 2011, and September 25, 2010, respectively. Fiscal year 2012 spanned 53 weeks, with a 14th week included in the first quarter of 2012, as is done approximately every six years to realign the Company’s fiscal quarters more closely to calendar quarters. Inclusion of the additional week in 2012 increased the Company’s overall net sales and operating expenses for the year. Fiscal years 2011 and 2010 spanned 52 weeks each. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years or quarters refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. Net Sales The following table shows net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during 2012, 2011, and 2010 (dollars in millions and units in thousands): (a) Includes revenue from iMac, Mac mini and Mac Pro sales. (b) Includes revenue from MacBook, MacBook Air and MacBook Pro sales. (c) Includes revenue from iPod sales. (d) Includes revenue from sales from the iTunes Store, App Store, and iBookstore in addition to sales of iPod services and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (e) Includes revenue from sales of iPhone, iPhone services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPhone accessories. (f) Includes revenue from sales of iPad, iPad services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPad accessories. (g) Includes revenue from sales of displays, networking products, and other hardware. (h) Includes revenue from sales of Apple-branded and third-party Mac software, and services. (i) Includes amortization of related revenue deferred for non-software services and embedded software upgrade rights. Fiscal Year 2012 versus 2011 Net sales during 2012 increased $48.3 billion or 45% compared to 2011. Several factors contributed positively to this increase, including the addition of a 14th week in the first quarter of 2012, as well as the following: • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $80.5 billion in 2012, representing an increase of $33.4 billion or 71% compared to 2011. iPhone unit sales totaled 125.0 million during 2012, representing an increase of 52.8 million units or 73% compared to 2011. The year-over-year growth in iPhone net sales and unit sales during 2012 reflects strong demand for iPhone in all of the Company’s operating segments, which is primarily a result of the launches of iPhone 4S in the first quarter of 2012 and iPhone 5 in the fourth quarter of 2012, ongoing demand for iPhone 4 and iPhone 3GS, and expanded distribution with new carriers and resellers. Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were 51% and 43% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. • Net sales of iPad and related products and services were $32.4 billion in 2012, representing an increase of $12.1 billion or 59% compared to 2011. Unit sales of iPad were 58.3 million during 2012, an increase of 80% from 2011. The year-over-year increase in iPad net sales and unit sales during 2012 was driven by strong demand for iPad in all of the Company’s operating segments as a result of the launch of the new iPad in March 2012, continued demand for iPad 2, and expanded distribution with new resellers. The year-over-year growth rate of iPad unit sales was higher than the growth rate of iPad net sales during 2012 due to a reduction of average selling prices as a result of a shift in product mix toward lower-priced iPad models, the price reduction for iPad 2 and an increase in indirect sales due to expanded distribution through third-party resellers. Net sales of iPad and related products and services were 21% and 19% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. • Mac net sales were $23.2 billion in 2012, representing an increase of $1.4 billion or 7% compared to 2011. Mac unit sales totaled 18.2 million during 2012, representing an increase of 1.4 million or 9% compared to 2011. The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales during 2012 reflects increased demand for Mac portables in all of the Company’s operating segments driven by 2012 releases of updated models of MacBook Air and MacBook Pro, including the new MacBook Pro with Retina display in June 2012. Partially offsetting the increase in net sales of Mac portables was a decline in net sales of Mac desktops that reflected the overall decline in the market for desktop personal computers during 2012. Additionally, the Company did not introduce updated versions of its Mac desktop products in 2012. Mac net sales were 15% and 20% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. • Net sales of other music related products and services were $8.5 billion in 2012, representing an increase of $2.2 billion or 35% compared to 2011. The increase was due primarily to growth of the iTunes Store, which generated total net sales of $7.5 billion for 2012 compared to net sales of $5.4 billion during 2011. The strong results of the iTunes Store reflect growth of the App Store; growth of the Company’s customer base; and the continued expansion of third-party audio, video and book content available for sale or rent via the iTunes Store. The Company continues to expand its iTunes content and applications offerings around the world. Net sales of other music related products and services were 5% and 6% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. Partially offsetting the positive factors contributing to the overall increase in net sales was a decrease in iPod net sales experienced across all operating segments. iPod net sales were $5.6 billion in 2012, a decrease of $1.8 billion or 25% compared to 2011. Similarly, iPod unit sales decreased by 17% in 2012 compared to 2011. Declines in net sales and unit sales of iPod reflect the continuing contraction of the overall market for MP3 players. Net sales of iPod were 4% and 7% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. The Company has historically experienced higher net sales in its first fiscal quarter compared to other quarters in its fiscal year due in part to holiday seasonal demand. Actual and anticipated timing of new product introductions by the Company can also significantly impact the level of net sales experienced by the Company in any particular quarter. However, neither historical seasonal patterns nor historical patterns of product introductions should be considered reliable indicators of the Company’s future net sales or financial performance. Growth in total net sales was particularly strong during the first six months of 2012, rising $34.1 billion or 66% compared to the same period in 2011. The net sales growth during the first six months of 2012 reflects the launch of iPhone 4S in the first quarter of 2012 and the Company’s ability to meet demand more quickly for iPhone 4S when compared to the iPhone 4 launch. Growth during the first half of 2012 was also favorably impacted by the addition of a 14th week in the first quarter of 2012 and strong unit sales of iPad during the holiday season, resulting in a 111% increase in iPad unit sales during the first quarter of 2012 compared to the same quarter in 2011. Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Net sales during 2011 increased $43.0 billion or 66% compared to 2010. Several factors contributed positively to this increase, including the following: • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $47.1 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $21.9 billion or 87% compared to 2010. iPhone unit sales totaled 72.3 million during 2011, representing an increase of 32.3 million units or 81% compared to 2010. iPhone year-over-year net sales growth reflected strong demand for iPhone 4 in all of the Company’s operating segments. The expanded U.S. distribution of iPhone to the Verizon Wireless network beginning in February 2011, continued expansion into new countries, and increased distribution with other new carriers and resellers also contributed to the year-over-year growth of iPhone. Net sales of iPhone and related products and services accounted for 43% and 39% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. • Net sales of iPad and related products and services, which the Company introduced in the third quarter of 2010, were $20.4 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $15.4 billion or 311% compared to 2010. Unit sales of iPad were 32.4 million during 2011, an increase of 334% from 2010. The year-over-year unit growth and net sales growth were driven by strong iPad demand in all of the Company’s operating segments. Net sales of iPad and related products and services accounted for 19% and 8% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. • Mac net sales were $21.8 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $4.3 billion or 25% compared to 2010. Mac unit sales increased by 3.1 million or 22% in 2011 compared to 2010. The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales was due primarily to higher demand in all of the Company’s operating segments for MacBook Air and MacBook Pro, which were updated in July 2011 and February 2011, respectively. The year-over-year revenue growth for portables and desktops was 36% and 4%, respectively. Mac net sales accounted for 20% and 27% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. • Net sales of other music related products and services were $6.3 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $1.4 billion or 28% compared to 2010. The increase was due primarily to increased net sales from the iTunes Store, which was largely driven by App Store expansion into new countries that contributed to strong growth in all of the Company’s geographic segments. During 2011, net sales for the iTunes Store, App Store and iBookstore was $5.4 billion, representing an increase of 33% compared to 2010. The Company believes this continued growth was the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading third-party digital content, continued growth in its customer base of iOS devices, expansion of third-party audio and video content available via the iTunes Store, and continued interest in and growth of the App Store. Net sales of other music related products and services accounted for 6% and 8% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. Partially offsetting the positive factors contributing to the overall increase in net sales was a decrease in iPod net sales of $821 million or 10% during 2011 compared to 2010. Similarly, iPod unit sales decreased by 15% in 2011 compared to 2010. However, net sales per iPod unit sold increased during 2011 compared to 2010 due primarily to a shift in iPod product mix toward iPod touch. Net sales of iPod accounted for 7% and 13% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Japan, Asia-Pacific and Retail operations. The results of the Americas, Europe, Japan and Asia-Pacific segments do not include results of the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Asia-Pacific segment includes Australia and Asian countries, other than Japan. The Retail segment operates Apple retail stores in 13 countries, including the U.S. Each operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Note 8, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Americas Net sales in the Americas segment increased $19.2 billion or 50% during 2012 compared to 2011. The growth in net sales during 2012 was primarily driven by increased demand for iPhone following the launches of iPhone 4S and iPhone 5, strong demand for the new iPad and iPad 2, and higher sales from the iTunes Store. The Americas segment represented approximately 37% and 35% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. Net sales in the Americas segment increased $13.8 billion or 56% during 2011 compared to 2010. The primary contributors to the growth in net sales was a significant year-over-year increase in iPhone sales from carrier expansion and strong demand for iPhone 4 and increased sales of iPad and Mac, partially offset by a decrease in iPod sales. Higher sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store also drove an increase in net sales during 2011. The Americas segment represented approximately 35% and 37% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. Europe Net sales in the Europe segment increased $8.5 billion or 31% during 2012 compared to 2011. The growth in net sales during 2012 was primarily driven by strong demand for the new iPad and iPad 2, higher sales from the iTunes Store and increased demand for iPhone from the launch of iPhone 4S. iPhone 5 was launched in a limited number of countries in the Europe segment at the end of the fourth quarter of 2012 and did not contribute to the growth in net sales in the Europe segment to the extent it did in other segments. Lower year-over-year growth in net sales in the Europe segment during 2012 compared to the Company’s other geographic segments reflects growth in iPhone unit sales that was well below the growth rates experienced by the Company’s other operating segments, partially offset by strong growth in iPad unit sales. Net sales in the Europe segment were also negatively impacted by the region’s uncertain economic conditions and the strength in the U.S. dollar relative to several European currencies, including the euro. The Europe segment represented approximately 23% and 26% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. Net sales in the Europe segment increased $9.1 billion or 49% during 2011 compared to 2010. The increase in net sales during 2011 was attributable primarily to the continued year-over-year increase in iPhone sales from carrier expansion and strong demand for iPhone 4, and increased sales of iPad and Mac, partially offset by a decrease in iPod sales. The Europe segment represented 26% and 29% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. Japan Net sales in the Japan segment increased $5.1 billion or 94% during 2012 compared to 2011. The growth in net sales during 2012 was primarily driven by increased demand for iPhone following the launches of iPhone 4S and iPhone 5, expanded distribution with a new iPhone carrier, strong demand for the new iPad and iPad 2, higher sales from the iTunes Store, and strength in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. The Japan segment represented approximately 7% and 5% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. Net sales in the Japan segment increased $1.5 billion or 37% during 2011 compared to 2010. The key contributors to Japan’s net sales growth were increased iPhone sales, strong sales of iPad, increased sales of Mac, and strength in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. The Japan segment represented 5% and 6% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. Asia-Pacific Net sales in the Asia-Pacific segment increased $10.7 billion or 47% during 2012 compared to 2011. The growth in net sales during 2012 was mainly due to increased demand for iPhone from the launch of iPhone 4S, strong demand for the new iPad and iPad 2, and higher Mac sales. Growth in the Asia Pacific segment was affected by the timing of iPhone and iPad product launches. iPhone 5 was launched in a limited number of countries in the Asia Pacific segment during the fourth quarter of 2012 and was not launched in China during 2012, and the new iPad that was introduced by the Company in March 2012 was not launched in China until the fourth quarter of 2012. The Asia-Pacific segment represented approximately 21% of the Company’s total net sales in both 2012 and 2011. Net sales in the Asia Pacific segment increased $14.3 billion or 174% during 2011 compared to 2010. The Company experienced particularly strong year-over-year net sales growth in its Asia Pacific segment during 2011, especially in Greater China, which includes Hong Kong and Taiwan. Korea and Australia also experienced strong year-over-year revenue growth. Higher net sales in the Asia Pacific segment were due mainly to the increase in iPhone sales primarily attributable to the strong demand for iPhone 4 and carrier expansion, strong sales of iPad, and increased Mac sales. The Asia Pacific segment represented 21% and 13% of the Company’s total net sales in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Retail Net sales in the Retail segment increased $4.7 billion or 33% during 2012 compared to 2011. The growth in net sales during 2012 was driven primarily by increased demand for iPhone following the launches of iPhone 4S and iPhone 5, strong demand for the new iPad and iPad 2, and higher Mac net sales. Lower year-over-year growth in net sales in the Retail segment during 2012 compared to the Company’s other segments reflects the significant growth in iPad indirect distribution channel expansion. The Retail segment accounted for 12% and 13% of the Company’s total net sales for 2012 and 2011, respectively. The Company opened 33 new retail stores during 2012, 28 of which were outside the U.S., ending the year with 390 stores open compared to 357 stores at the end of 2011. As of September 29, 2012, the Company had a total of 250 U.S. retail stores and 140 international retail stores. With an average of 365 stores and 326 stores during 2012 and 2011, respectively, average revenue per store increased 19% to $51.5 million in 2012 compared to $43.3 million in 2011. Net sales in the Retail segment increased $4.3 billion or 44% during 2011 compared to 2010. The increase in net sales was driven primarily by strong demand for iPad, higher Mac sales, and an increase in iPhone sales. The Company opened 40 new retail stores during 2011, 28 of which were outside the U.S., ending the year with 357 stores open compared to 317 stores at the end of 2010. As of September 24, 2011, the Company had a total of 245 U.S. retail stores and 112 international retail stores. During 2011, the Company had an average of 326 stores compared to an average of 288 stores during 2010. The average revenue per store increased 27% to $43.3 million in 2011 compared to $34.1 million in 2010. The Retail segment represented 13% and 15% of the Company’s total net sales in 2011 and 2010, respectively. The Retail segment’s operating income was $4.7 billion, $3.2 billion, and $2.3 billion during 2012, 2011, and 2010 respectively. These year-over-year increases in Retail operating income were primarily attributable to higher overall net sales that resulted in significantly higher average revenue per store during the respective years. Gross Margin Gross margin for 2012, 2011 and 2010 are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): The gross margin percentage in 2012 was 43.9%, compared to 40.5% in 2011. This year-over-year increase in gross margin was largely driven by lower commodity and other product costs, a higher mix of iPhone sales, and improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales. The increase in gross margin was partially offset by the impact of a stronger U.S. dollar. The gross margin percentage during the first half of 2012 was 45.9% compared to 41.4% during the second half of 2012. The primary drivers of higher gross margin in the first half of 2012 compared to the second half are a higher mix of iPhone sales and improved leverage on fixed costs from higher net sales. Additionally, gross margin in the second half of 2012 was also affected by the introduction of new products with flat pricing that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers, price reductions on certain existing products, higher transition costs associated with product launches, and continued strengthening of the U.S. dollar; partially offset by lower commodity costs. The gross margin percentage in 2011 was 40.5%, compared to 39.4% in 2010. This year-over-year increase in gross margin was largely driven by lower commodity and other product costs. The Company expects to experience decreases in its gross margin percentage in future periods, as compared to levels achieved during 2012, and the Company anticipates gross margin of about 36% during the first quarter of 2013. Expected future declines in gross margin are largely due to a higher mix of new and innovative products with flat or reduced pricing that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers and anticipated component cost and other cost increases. Future strengthening of the U.S. dollar could further negatively impact gross margin. The foregoing statements regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage in future periods, including the first quarter of 2013, are forward-looking and could differ from actual results because of several factors including, but not limited to those set forth above in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors” and those described in this paragraph. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions and potential increases in the cost of components, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for 2012, 2011, and 2010 are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development (“R&D”) Expense R&D expense increased $952 million or 39% in 2012 compared to 2011 and $647 million or 36% in 2011 compared to 2010. The growth in R&D expense was driven by an increase in headcount and related expenses to support expanded R&D activities. Although total R&D expense increased 39% and 36% in 2012 and 2011, respectively, it remained fairly consistent as a percentage of net sales. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to make further investments in R&D to remain competitive. Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expense SG&A expense increased $2.4 billion or 32% during 2012 compared to 2011 and $2.1 billion or 38% during 2011 compared to 2010. These increases were primarily due to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment, increased headcount and related expenses, higher spending on professional services, marketing and advertising programs, and increased variable costs associated with the overall growth of the Company’s net sales. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for 2012, 2011, and 2010 are as follows (in millions): Total other income and expense increased $107 million or 26% to $522 million during 2012 compared to $415 million and $155 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. The year-over-year increase in other income and expense during 2012 was due primarily to higher interest and dividend income on the Company’s higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, partially offset by higher premium expenses on foreign exchange contracts. The overall increase in other income and expense in 2011 compared to 2010 was attributable to higher interest income and net realized gains on sales of marketable securities. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.03%, 0.77%, and 0.75% during 2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively. During 2012, 2011, and 2010, the Company had no debt outstanding and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense. Provision for Income Taxes The Company’s effective tax rates were approximately 25.2%, 24.2%, and 24.4% for 2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively. The Company’s effective rates for these periods differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. As of September 29, 2012, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $4.0 billion, and deferred tax liabilities of $14.9 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of a valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for the years 2004 through 2006 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company has contested certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. The IRS is currently examining the years 2007 through 2009. All IRS audit issues for years prior to 2004 have been resolved. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended September 29, 2012, September 24, 2011, and September 25, 2010 (in millions): As of September 29, 2012, the Company had $121.3 billion in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, an increase of $39.7 billion or 49% from September 24, 2011. The principal components of this net increase was the cash generated by operating activities of $50.9 billion, which was partially offset by payments for acquisition of property, plant and equipment of $8.3 billion, payments for acquisition of intangible assets of $1.1 billion and payments of dividends and dividend equivalent rights of $2.5 billion. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly-rated securities and its investment policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The policy requires investments generally to be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. As of September 29, 2012 and September 24, 2011, $82.6 billion and $54.3 billion, respectively, of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments, common stock repurchases, dividends on its common stock, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $10.3 billion during 2012, consisting of $865 million for retail store facilities and $9.5 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and other corporate facilities and infrastructure. The Company’s actual cash payments for capital expenditures during 2012 were $8.3 billion. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $10 billion for capital expenditures during 2013, including approximately $850 million for retail store facilities and approximately $9.15 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements. During 2013, the Company expects to open about 30 to 35 new retail stores, with approximately three-quarters located outside of the U.S. Dividend and Stock Repurchase Program In March 2012, the Board of Directors of the Company approved a dividend policy pursuant to which it plans to pay, subject to subsequent declaration, quarterly dividends of $2.65 per share. The Company expects to pay approximately $2.5 billion each quarter in conjunction with the quarterly declared dividends. In March 2012, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a program to repurchase up to $10 billion of the Company’s common stock beginning in 2013. The repurchase program is expected to be executed over a three-year period with the primary objective of neutralizing the impact of dilution from future employee equity grants and employee stock purchase programs. The repurchase program does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares. The Company anticipates that it will utilize approximately $45 billion of domestic cash to pay dividends, repurchase shares, and to remit withheld taxes related to net share settlement of restricted stock units in the first three years of the dividend and stock repurchase programs. The Company anticipates the cash used for future dividends and the repurchase program will come primarily from current domestic cash and from on-going U.S. operating activities and the cash generated from such activities. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 29, 2012 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet (in millions): Lease Commitments The Company’s major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms not exceeding five additional years. Leases for retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. As of September 29, 2012, the Company’s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were $4.4 billion, of which $3.1 billion related to leases for retail space. Purchase Commitments with Outsourcing Partners and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and testing of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. As of September 29, 2012, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of $21.1 billion. Other Obligations In addition to the off-balance sheet commitments mentioned above, the Company had outstanding obligations of $988 million as of September 29, 2012, that were comprised mainly of commitments to acquire capital assets, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to advertising, research and development, Internet and telecommunications services and other obligations. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 29, 2012, the Company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $13.8 billion. Additionally, as of September 29, 2012, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $2.1 billion and an additional $401 million for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified third-party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or application software for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights. The Company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of September 29, 2012 or September 24, 2011. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations, and payments made under these agreements historically have not been material. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled “Risk Factors” above, which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets mobile communication and media devices, personal computers, and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, networking solutions, and third-party digital content and applications. The Company’s products and services include iPhone, iPad, Mac, iPod, Apple TV, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the iOS and Mac OS X operating systems, iCloud, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company also sells and delivers digital content and applications through the iTunes Store, App Store, iBookstore, and Mac App Store. The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, as well as through third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party iPhone, iPad, Mac and iPod compatible products, including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and peripherals through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumers, small and mid-sized businesses, and education, enterprise and government customers. The Company is committed to bringing the best user experience to its customers through its innovative hardware, software, peripherals, and services. The Company’s business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating systems, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative design. As part of its strategy, the Company continues to expand its platform for the discovery and delivery of third-party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store. As part of the iTunes Store, the Company’s App Store and iBookstore allow customers to discover and download applications and books through either a Mac or Windows-based computer or through “iOS devices,” namely iPhone, iPad and iPod touch. In January 2011, the Company opened the Mac App Store to allow customers to easily discover, download and install applications for their Macs. The Company also supports a community for the development of third-party software and hardware products and digital content that complement the Company’s offerings. The Company’s strategy also includes expanding its distribution network to effectively reach more customers and provide them with a high-quality sales and post-sales support experience. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including mobile communications and media devices with its iPhone, iPad and iPod product families; personal computers with its Mac computers; and distribution of third-party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store, App Store, iBookstore, and Mac App Store. While the Company is widely recognized as a leading innovator in the markets where it competes, these markets are highly competitive and subject to aggressive pricing. To remain competitive, the Company believes that continual investment in research and development and marketing and advertising is critical to the development and sale of innovative products and technologies. The Company’s research and development spending is focused on investing in new hardware and software products, and in further developing its existing products, including iPhone, iPad, Mac, and iPod hardware; iOS and Mac OS X operating systems; and a variety of application software and online services. The Company uses a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels, such as its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, and third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware and software integration, and demonstrate the unique solutions that are available on its products. The Company further believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its products over those of its competitors and providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by expanding the number of its own retail stores worldwide. Additionally, the Company has invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality Apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third-party reseller locations. Through the Apple Premium Reseller Program, certain third-party resellers focus on the Apple platform by providing a high level of integration and support services, and product expertise. Japan Earthquake and Tsunami and Thailand Flooding On March 11, 2011, the northeast coast of Japan experienced a severe earthquake followed by a tsunami, with continuing aftershocks. These geological events have caused significant damage in the region, including severe damage to nuclear power plants, and have impacted Japan’s power and other infrastructure as well as its economy. Certain of the Company’s suppliers are located in Japan, and certain of its other suppliers integrate components or use materials manufactured in Japan in the production of its products. To the extent that component production has been affected, the Company has generally obtained alternative sources of supply or implemented other measures. The Company does not currently believe these events will have a material impact on its operations in the first quarter of 2012 unless conditions worsen, including, but not limited to, power outages and expansion of evacuation zones around the nuclear power plants. Beyond the first quarter of 2012, uncertainty exists with respect to the availability of electrical power, the damage to nuclear power plants and the impact to other infrastructure. Thus, there is a risk that the Company could in the future experience delays or other constraints in obtaining key components and products and/or price increases related to such components and products that could materially adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. In addition, in recent months several regions of Thailand have experienced severe flooding, causing damage to infrastructure, housing and factories. A number of the Company’s suppliers are located in Thailand. As with Japan, to the extent that component production has been affected, the Company will work to obtain alternative sources of supply or implement other measures. Based on the Company’s current assessment of the situation, it does not believe this event will have a material impact on its operations in the first quarter of 2012; however, because the situation in Thailand is still evolving uncertainty remains regarding the ultimate impact of this event on the Company. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers recognition of revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products, software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include hardware products containing software essential to the hardware product’s functionality, undelivered software elements that relate to the hardware product’s essential software, and undelivered non-software services, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of the selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For sales of iPhone, iPad, Apple TV, for sales of iPod touch beginning in June 2010, and for sales of Mac beginning in June 2011, the Company has indicated it may from time-to-time provide future unspecified software upgrades and features free of charge to customers. In June 2011, the Company announced it would begin providing various non-software services to owners of qualifying versions of iOS devices and Mac. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for these unspecified software upgrade rights or the non-software services, revenue is allocated to these rights and services based on the Company’s ESPs. Amounts allocated to the unspecified software upgrade rights and non-software services are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated lives of each of these devices, which range from 24 to 48 months. The Company’s process for determining ESPs involves management’s judgment. The Company’s process considers multiple factors that may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. If the facts and circumstances underlying the factors considered change, including the estimated or actual costs incurred to provide non-software services or the estimated lives of the related devices, or should future facts and circumstances lead the Company to consider additional factors, the Company’s ESP for software upgrades and non-software services related to future sales of these devices could change. If the estimated life of one or more of the devices should change, the future rate of amortization of the revenue allocated to the software upgrade rights would also change. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have a negative impact on the Company’s results of operations. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact the Company’s net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost, the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto, and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it is more likely than not it will be required to sell, the security before recovery of the its amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment on whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired, could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs, which would negatively affect its results of operations in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company records accruals for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company’s requirements for periods up to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would negatively affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost of hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could materially affect the Company’s results of operations. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Note 7, “Commitments and Contingencies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss, or a material loss in excess of a recorded accrual, with respect to loss contingencies. However, the outcome of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company are subject to significant uncertainty. Therefore, although management considers the likelihood of such an outcome to be remote, if one or more of these legal matters were resolved against the Company in the same reporting period for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Net Sales Fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009 each spanned 52 weeks. An additional week is included in the first fiscal quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. Fiscal year 2012 will end on September 29, 2012 and will span 53 weeks, with a 14th week added to the first quarter of 2012. The following table summarizes net sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during the three years ended September 24, 2011 (in millions, except unit sales in thousands and per unit amounts): (a) Includes iMac, Mac mini, Mac Pro and Xserve product lines. (b) Includes MacBook, MacBook Air and MacBook Pro product lines. (c) Includes sales from the iTunes Store, App Store, and iBookstore in addition to sales of iPod services and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (d) Includes revenue recognized from iPhone sales, carrier agreements, services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPhone accessories. (e) Includes revenue recognized from iPad sales, services and Apple-branded and third-party iPad accessories. (f) Includes sales of displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories. (g) Includes sales from the Mac App Store in addition to sales of other Apple-branded and third-party Mac software and Mac and Internet services. NM = Not Meaningful Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Net sales during 2011 increased $43.0 billion or 66% compared to 2010. Several factors contributed positively to this increase, including the following: • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $47.1 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $21.9 billion or 87% compared to 2010. iPhone handset unit sales totaled 72.3 million during 2011, representing an increase of 32.3 million units or 81% compared to 2010. iPhone year-over-year net sales growth reflected strong demand for iPhone 4 in all of the Company’s operating segments. The expanded U.S. distribution of iPhone to the Verizon Wireless network beginning in February 2011, continued expansion into new countries, and increased distribution with other new carriers and resellers also contributed to the year-over-year growth of iPhone. As of September 24, 2011, the Company distributed iPhone in 105 countries through 228 carriers. Additionally, the Company distributes iPhone through its direct channels and certain third-party resellers. Net sales of iPhone and related products and services accounted for 43% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011. • Net sales of iPad and related products and services, which the Company introduced in the third quarter of 2010, were $20.4 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $15.4 billion or 311% compared to 2010. Unit sales of iPad were 32.4 million during 2011, an increase of 334% from 2010. The year-over-year unit growth and net sales growth were driven by strong iPad demand in all of the Company’s operating segments. The Company distributes iPad through its direct channels, certain cellular network carriers’ distribution channels and certain third-party resellers. The Company distributed iPad in 90 countries as of September 24, 2011 compared to 26 countries as of September 25, 2010. Net sales of iPad and related products and services accounted for 19% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011. • Mac net sales were $21.8 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $4.3 billion or 25% compared to 2010. Mac unit sales increased by 3.1 million or 22% in 2011 compared to 2010. The year-over-year growth in Mac net sales and unit sales was due primarily to higher demand in all of the Company’s operating segments for MacBook Air and MacBook Pro, which were updated in July 2011 and February 2011, respectively. The year-over-year revenue growth for portables and desktops was 36% and 4%, respectively. Net sales of the Company’s Macs accounted for 20% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011. • Net sales of other music related products and services were $6.3 billion in 2011, representing an increase of $1.4 billion or 28% compared to 2010. The increase was due primarily to increased net sales from the iTunes Store, which was largely driven by App Store expansion into new countries that contributed to strong growth in all of the Company’s geographic segments. During 2011, the combined net sales for the iTunes Store, App Store and iBookstore was $5.4 billion, representing an increase of 33% compared to 2010. The Company believes this continued growth is the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading third-party digital content, continued growth in its customer base of iPhone, iPad and iPod, expansion of third-party audio and video content available via the iTunes Store, and continued interest in and growth of the App Store. Net sales of other music related products and services accounted for 6% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011. Partially offsetting the positive factors contributing to the overall increase in net sales was a decrease in iPod net sales of $821 million or 10% during 2011 compared to 2010. Similarly, iPod unit sales decreased by 15% in 2011 compared to 2010. However, net sales per iPod unit sold increased during 2011 compared to 2010 due primarily to a shift in iPod product mix toward iPod touch. Net sales of iPod accounted for 7% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011. Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Net sales during 2010 increased $22.3 billion or 52% compared to 2009. Several factors contributed positively to this increase, including the following: • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $25.2 billion in 2010 representing an increase of $12.1 billion or 93% compared to 2009. iPhone unit sales totaled 40 million in 2010, which represents an increase of 19.3 million or 93% compared to 2009. iPhone year-over-year growth was attributable primarily to continued growth from existing carriers, expanded distribution with new international carriers and resellers, and strong demand for iPhone 4, which was released in the U.S. in June 2010 and in many other countries over the remainder of 2010. As of September 25, 2010, the Company distributed iPhone in 89 countries through 166 carriers. Net sales of iPhone and related products and services accounted for 39% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010 compared to 30% in 2009. • Net sales of iPad and related products and services were $5.0 billion and unit sales of iPad were 7.5 million during 2010. iPad was released in the U.S. in April 2010 and in various other countries over the remainder of 2010. As of September 25, 2010, the Company distributed iPad in 26 countries. The Company distributes iPad through its direct channels, certain cellular network carriers’ distribution channels and certain third-party resellers. Net sales of iPad and related products and services accounted for 8% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010, reflecting the strong demand for iPad during the five months following its release. • Mac net sales increased by $3.6 billion or 26% in 2010 compared to 2009, and Mac unit sales increased by 3.3 million or 31% in 2010 compared to 2009. Net sales per Mac unit sold decreased by 4% in 2010 compared to 2009 due primarily to lower average selling prices of Mac portable systems. During 2010, net sales and unit sales of the Company’s Mac portable systems increased by 18% and 25%, respectively, primarily attributable to strong demand for MacBook Pro, which was updated in April 2010. Net sales and unit sales of the Company’s Mac desktop systems increased by 43% and 45%, respectively, as a result of higher sales of iMac, which was updated in July 2010. Net sales of the Company’s Macs accounted for 27% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 compared to 32% in 2009. • Net sales of other music related products and services increased $912 million or 23% during 2010 compared to 2009. This increase was due primarily to growth of the iTunes Store which generated total net sales of $4.1 billion for 2010. The results of the iTunes Store reflect growth of the iTunes App Store, continued growth in the installed base of iPhone, iPad, and iPod customers, and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale and rent via the iTunes Store. The Company continues to expand its iTunes content and applications offerings around the world. Net sales of other music related products and services accounted for 8% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010 compared to 9% in 2009. • Net sales of iPods increased $183 million or 2% during 2010, while iPod unit sales declined by 7% during 2010 compared to 2009. Net sales per iPod unit sold increased by 10% to $164 in 2010 compared to 2009, due to a shift in product mix toward iPod touch. iPod touch experienced strong growth in each of the Company’s reportable operating segments. Net sales of iPods accounted for 13% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010 compared to 19% in 2009. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Japan, Asia-Pacific and Retail operations. The results of the Americas, Europe, Japan and Asia-Pacific reportable segments do not include the results of the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries, as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Asia-Pacific segment includes Australia and Asian countries, other than Japan. The Retail segment operates Apple retail stores in 11 countries. Each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Note 8, “Segment Information and Geographic Data” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Americas During 2011, net sales in the Americas segment increased $13.8 billion or 56% compared to 2010. The primary contributors to the growth in net sales was a significant year-over-year increase in iPhone revenue from carrier expansion and strong demand for iPhone 4 and increased sales of iPad and Macs, partially offset by a decrease in iPod net sales. Higher sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store and App Store also drove an increase in sales during 2011. The Americas segment represented approximately 35% and 37% of the Company’s total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. During 2010, net sales in the Americas segment increased $5.5 billion or 29% compared to 2009. This increase in net sales was driven by increased iPhone revenue, strong demand for iPad, continued demand for Mac desktop and portable systems, and higher sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store. The Americas segment represented 37% and 44% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively. Europe For 2011, net sales in the Europe segment increased $9.1 billion or 49%, compared to 2010. The increase in net sales during 2011 was attributable primarily to the continued year-over-year increase in iPhone revenue from carrier expansion and strong demand for iPhone 4, and increased sales of iPad and Macs, partially offset by a decrease in iPod net sales. The Europe segment represented 26% and 29% of total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. During 2010, net sales in Europe increased $6.9 billion or 58% compared to 2009. The growth in net sales was due mainly to a significant increase in iPhone revenue attributable to continued growth from existing carriers and country and carrier expansion, increased sales of Mac desktop and portable systems and strong demand for iPad, partially offset by a stronger U.S. dollar. The Europe segment represented 29% and 28% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively. Japan Japan’s net sales increased $1.5 billion or 37% during 2011 compared to 2010. The key contributors to Japan’s net sales growth were increased iPhone revenue, strong sales of iPad, increased sales of Macs, and strength in the Japanese Yen relative to the U.S. dollar. The Japan segment represented 5% and 6% of total net sales for 2011 and 2010, respectively. The recent earthquakes and tsunami that struck the northeast coast of Japan have created uncertainty regarding general economic and market conditions in Japan. Any significant impact of these events on consumer demand could negatively impact the Company’s net sales in Japan in the future. The Company does not currently believe that the impact of these events will have a material adverse effect on the Company or its results of operations. During 2010, Japan’s net sales increased $1.7 billion or 75% compared to 2009. The primary contributors to this growth were significant year-over-year increases in iPhone revenue, strong demand for iPad, and to a lesser extent strength in the Japanese Yen. The Japan segment represented 6% and 5% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010 and 2009, respectively. Asia-Pacific Net sales in the Asia Pacific segment increased $14.3 billion or 174% during 2011 compared to 2010. The Company experienced particularly strong year-over-year net sales growth in its Asia Pacific segment during 2011, especially in Greater China, which includes Hong Kong and Taiwan. Korea and Australia also experienced strong year-over-year revenue growth. Higher net sales in the Asia Pacific segment were due mainly to the increase in iPhone revenue primarily attributable to the strong demand for iPhone 4 and carrier expansion, strong sales of iPad, and increased sales of Macs. The Asia Pacific segment represented 21% and 13% of total net sales in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Net sales in Asia-Pacific increased $5.1 billion or 160% during 2010 compared to 2009. The significant growth in Asia-Pacific net sales was due mainly to increased iPhone revenue, which was primarily attributable to country and carrier expansion and continued growth from existing carriers. Asia-Pacific net sales were also favorably affected by strong demand for Mac portable and desktop systems and for iPad. Particularly strong year-over-year growth was experienced in China, Korea and Australia. The Asia-Pacific segment represented 13% and 7% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010 and 2009, respectively. Retail Retail segment net sales increased $4.3 billion or 44% during 2011 compared to 2010. The increase in net sales was driven primarily by strong demand for iPad, higher sales of Macs, and an increase in iPhone revenue. The Company opened 40 new retail stores during 2011, 28 of which were outside the U.S., ending the year with 357 stores open compared to 317 stores at the end of 2010. As of September 24, 2011, the Company had a total of 245 U.S. retail stores and 112 international retail stores. During 2011, the Company had an average of 326 stores compared to an average of 288 stores during 2010. The average revenue per store increased 27% to $43.3 million in 2011 compared to $34.1 million in 2010. The Retail segment represented 13% and 15% of total net sales in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Retail net sales increased $3.1 billion or 47% during 2010 compared to 2009. The increase in net sales was driven primarily by strong demand for iPad, increased sales of Mac desktop and portable systems and a significant year-over-year increase in iPhone revenue. The Company opened 44 new retail stores during 2010, 28 of which were outside the U.S., ending the year with 317 stores open compared to 273 stores at the end of 2009. With an average of 288 stores and 254 stores opened during 2010 and 2009, respectively, average revenue per store increased to $34.1 million in 2010, compared to $26.2 million in 2009. The Retail segment represented 15% and 16% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively. The Retail segment reported operating income of $3.3 billion during 2011 compared to $2.4 billion during 2010. The year-over-year increase in Retail operating income was primarily attributable to higher overall net sales that resulted in significantly higher average revenue per store during 2011 compared to 2010. The Retail segment reported operating income of $1.7 billion during 2009. The increase in Retail operating income during 2010 compared to 2009 was attributable to higher overall net sales. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital asset purchases associated with the Retail segment since inception totaled $2.8 billion through the end of 2011. As of September 24, 2011, the Retail segment had approximately 36,000 full-time equivalent employees and had outstanding lease commitments associated with retail space and related facilities of $2.4 billion. The Company would incur substantial costs if it were to close multiple retail stores and such costs could adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Gross Margin Gross margin for the three years ended September 24, 2011, are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): The gross margin percentage in 2011 was 40.5%, compared to 39.4% in 2010. This year-over-year increase in gross margin was largely driven by lower commodity and other product costs. The gross margin percentage in 2010 was 39.4% compared to 40.1% in 2009. This year-over-year decline in gross margin was primarily attributable to new products that had higher cost structures, including iPad, partially offset by a more favorable sales mix of iPhone, which had a higher gross margin than the Company average. The Company expects to experience decreases in its gross margin percentage in future periods, as compared to levels achieved during 2011, largely due to a higher mix of new and innovative products with flat or reduced pricing that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers, and potential future component cost and other cost increases. The foregoing statements regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage are forward-looking and could differ from anticipated levels because of several factors including, but not limited to certain of those set forth below in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” under the subheading “Future operating results depend upon the Company’s ability to obtain components in sufficient quantities,” which is incorporated herein by reference. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions and potential increases in the cost of components, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to these competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for the three years ended September 24, 2011, are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development Expense (“R&D”) R&D expense increased $647 million or 36% to $2.4 billion in 2011 compared to 2010. This increase was due primarily to an increase in headcount and related expenses to support expanded R&D activities. Although total R&D expense increased 36% during 2011 compared to 2010, it declined slightly as a percentage of net sales, due to the 66% year-over-year growth in the Company’s net sales during 2011. R&D expense increased 34% or $449 million to $1.8 billion in 2010 compared to 2009. This increase was due primarily to an increase in headcount and related expenses in the current year to support expanded R&D activities. Also contributing to this increase in R&D expense in 2010 was the capitalization in 2009 of software development costs of $71 million related to Mac OS X Snow Leopard. Although total R&D expense increased 34% during 2010, it declined as a percentage of net sales given the 52% year-over-year increase in net sales in 2010. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to make further investments in R&D to remain competitive. Selling, General and Administrative Expense (“SG&A”) SG&A expense increased $2.1 billion or 38% to $7.6 billion during 2011 compared to 2010. This increase was due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment, increased headcount and related costs, higher spending on professional services and marketing and advertising programs, and increased variable costs associated with the overall growth of the Company’s net sales. SG&A expense increased $1.4 billion or 33% to $5.5 billion in 2010 compared to 2009. This increase was due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment, higher spending on marketing and advertising programs, increased share-based compensation expenses and variable costs associated with the overall growth of the Company’s net sales. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for the three years ended September 24, 2011, are as follows (in millions): Total other income and expense increased $260 million or 168% to $415 million during 2011 compared to $155 million and $326 million in 2010 and 2009, respectively. The year-over-year increase in other income and expense during 2011 was due primarily to higher interest income and net realized gains on sales of marketable securities. The overall decrease in other income and expense in 2010 compared to 2009 was attributable to the significant declines in interest rates on a year-over-year basis, partially offset by the Company’s higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances. Additionally the Company incurred higher premium expenses on its foreign exchange option contracts, which further reduced the total other income and expense. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 0.77%, 0.75% and 1.43% during 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. During 2011, 2010 and 2009, the Company had no debt outstanding and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense. Provision for Income Taxes The Company’s effective tax rates were approximately 24.2%, 24.4% and 31.8% for 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The Company’s effective rates for these periods differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. As of September 24, 2011, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $3.2 billion, and deferred tax liabilities of $9.2 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of a valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for the years 2004 through 2006 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company has contested certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. The IRS is currently examining the years 2007 through 2009. All IRS audit issues for years prior to 2004 have been resolved. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the three years ended September 24, 2011 (in millions): Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities increased $30.6 billion or 60% during 2011. The principal components of this net increase was the cash generated by operating activities of $37.5 billion, which was partially offset by payments for acquisition of property, plant and equipment of $4.3 billion, payments for acquisition of intangible assets of $3.2 billion and payments made in connection with business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $244 million. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly rated securities and its policy generally limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The Company’s investment policy requires investments to generally be investment grade with the objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. As of September 24, 2011 and September 25, 2010, $54.3 billion and $30.8 billion, respectively, of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $4.6 billion during 2011, consisting of approximately $614 million for retail store facilities and $4.0 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, real estate for the future development of the Company’s second corporate campus, and other corporate facilities and infrastructure. The Company’s actual cash payments for capital expenditures during 2011 were $4.3 billion, of which $612 million relates to retail store facilities. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $8.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2012, including approximately $900 million for retail store facilities and approximately $7.1 billion for product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements. During 2012, the Company expects to open about 40 new retail stores, approximately three-quarters of which will be located outside of the U.S. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 24, 2011 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet (in millions): Lease Commitments The Company’s major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms not exceeding five additional years. Leases for retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. As of September 24, 2011, the Company’s total future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating leases were $3.0 billion, of which $2.4 billion related to leases for retail space. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several outsourcing partners to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These outsourcing partners acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods up to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. As of September 24, 2011, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of $13.9 billion. Other Obligations Other outstanding obligations were $2.4 billion as of September 24, 2011, and were comprised mainly of commitments under long-term supply agreements to make additional inventory component prepayments and to acquire capital equipment, commitments to acquire product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and commitments related to advertising, research and development, Internet and telecommunications services and other obligations. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 24, 2011, the Company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $8.2 billion. Additionally, as of September 24, 2011, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $1.4 billion and an additional $261 million for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years in connection with these tax liabilities; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnification The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified third-party. In the opinion of management, there was not at least a reasonable possibility the Company may have incurred a material loss with respect to indemnification of end-users of its operating system or application software for infringement of third-party intellectual property rights. The Company did not record a liability for infringement costs related to indemnification as of either September 24, 2011 or September 25, 2010. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations, and payments made under these agreements historically have not been material. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled “Risk Factors” above, which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets a range of personal computers, mobile communication and media devices, and portable digital music players, and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, networking solutions, and third-party digital content and applications. The Company’s products and services include Mac computers, iPhone, iPad, iPod, Apple TV, Xserve, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the Mac OS X and iOS operating systems, third-party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company sells its products worldwide through its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, and third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Mac, iPhone, iPad and iPod compatible products, including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and peripherals through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to SMB, education, enterprise, government, and creative markets. The Company is committed to bringing the best user experience to its customers through its innovative hardware, software, peripherals, services, and Internet offerings. The Company’s business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating systems, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative industrial design. The Company believes continual investment in research and development is critical to the development and enhancement of innovative products and technologies. In conjunction with its strategy, the Company continues to build and host a robust platform for the discovery and delivery of third-party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store. Within the iTunes Store, the Company has expanded its offerings through the App Store and iBookstore, which allow customers to browse, search for, and purchase third-party applications and books through either a Mac or Windows-based computer or by wirelessly downloading directly to an iPhone, iPad or iPod touch. The Company also works to support a community for the development of third-party software and hardware products and digital content that complement the Company’s offerings. Additionally, the Company’s strategy includes expanding its distribution network to effectively reach more customers and provide them with a high-quality sales and post-sales support experience. The Company is therefore uniquely positioned to offer superior and well-integrated digital lifestyle and productivity solutions. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including personal computers with its Mac computers; mobile communications and media devices with its iPhone, iPad and iPod product families; and distribution of third-party digital content and applications with its online iTunes Store. While the Company is widely recognized as a leading innovator in the markets where it competes, these markets are highly competitive and subject to aggressive pricing. To remain competitive, the Company believes that increased investment in research and development and marketing and advertising is necessary to maintain or expand its position in the markets where it competes. The Company’s research and development spending is focused on further developing its existing Mac line of personal computers; the Mac OS X and iOS operating systems; application software for the Mac; iPhone, iPad and iPod and related software; development of new digital lifestyle consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new product areas and technologies. The Company also believes increased investment in marketing and advertising programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness. The Company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels, including its retail stores, online stores, and direct sales force, and third-party cellular network carriers, wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration, demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available on its products, and demonstrate the compatibility of the Mac with the Windows platform and networks. The Company further believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an effective way to demonstrate the advantages of its products over those of its competitors and providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by expanding the number of its own retail stores worldwide. Additionally, the Company has invested in programs to enhance reseller sales by placing high quality Apple fixtures, merchandising materials and other resources within selected third-party reseller locations. Through the Apple Premium Reseller Program, certain third-party resellers focus on the Apple platform by providing a high level of integration and support services, and product expertise. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of marketable securities, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers recognition of revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of hardware products (e.g., Macs, iPhones, iPads, iPods and peripherals), software bundled with hardware that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, and third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store in accordance with general revenue recognition accounting guidance. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with industry specific software accounting guidance for the following types of sales transactions: (i) standalone sales of software products, (ii) sales of software upgrades and (iii) sales of software bundled with hardware not essential to the functionality of the hardware. For multi-element arrangements that include tangible products containing software essential to the tangible product’s functionality and undelivered software elements relating to the tangible product’s essential software, the Company allocates revenue to all deliverables based on their relative selling prices. In such circumstances, the Company uses a hierarchy to determine the selling price to be used for allocating revenue to deliverables: (i) vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value (“VSOE”), (ii) third-party evidence of selling price (“TPE”) and (iii) best estimate of the selling price (“ESP”). VSOE generally exists only when the Company sells the deliverable separately and is the price actually charged by the Company for that deliverable. ESPs reflect the Company’s best estimates of what the selling prices of elements would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. For all past and current sales of iPhone, iPad, Apple TV and for sales of iPod touch beginning in June 2010, the Company indicated it might from time-to-time provide future unspecified software upgrades and features free of charge to customers. The Company has identified two deliverables in arrangements involving the sale of these devices. The first deliverable is the hardware and software essential to the functionality of the hardware device delivered at the time of sale. The second deliverable is the embedded right included with the purchase of iPhone, iPad, iPod touch and Apple TV to receive on a when-and-if-available basis, future unspecified software upgrades and features relating to the product’s essential software. The Company has allocated revenue between these two deliverables using the relative selling price method. Because the Company has neither VSOE nor TPE for the two deliverables, the allocation of revenue has been based on the Company’s ESPs. Amounts allocated to the delivered hardware and the related essential software are recognized at the time of sale provided the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. Amounts allocated to the embedded unspecified software upgrade right are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the 24-month estimated life of each of these devices. All product cost of sales, including estimated warranty costs, are recognized at the time of sale. Costs for engineering and sales and marketing are expensed as incurred. If the estimated life of the hardware product should change, the future rate of amortization of the revenue allocated to the software upgrade right will also change. The Company’s process for determining its ESP for deliverables without VSOE or TPE involves management’s judgment. The Company’s process considers multiple factors that may vary depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each deliverable. The Company believes its customers, particularly consumers, would be reluctant to buy unspecified software upgrade rights related to iPhone, iPad, iPod touch and Apple TV. This view is primarily based on the fact that unspecified upgrade rights do not obligate the Company to provide upgrades at a particular time or at all, and do not specify to customers which upgrades or features will be delivered. Therefore, the Company has concluded if it were to sell upgrade rights on a standalone basis, including those rights associated with iPhone, iPad, iPod touch and Apple TV, the selling price would be relatively low. Key factors considered by the Company in developing the ESPs for these upgrade rights include prices charged by the Company for similar offerings, the Company’s historical pricing practices, the nature of the upgrade rights (e.g., unspecified and when-and-if-available), and the relative ESP of the upgrade rights as compared to the total selling price of the product. The Company may also consider, when appropriate, the impact of other products and services, including advertising services, on selling price assumptions when developing and reviewing its ESPs for software upgrade rights and related deliverables. The Company may also consider additional factors as appropriate, including the pricing of competitive alternatives if they exist, and product-specific business objectives. If the facts and circumstances underlying the factors considered change or should future facts and circumstances lead the Company to consider additional factors, the Company’s ESP for software upgrades related to future sales for these devices could change. Beginning in the third quarter of 2010 in conjunction with the announcement of iOS 4, the Company’s ESPs for the embedded software upgrade rights included with iPhone, iPad and iPod touch reflect the positive financial impact expected by the Company as a result of its introduction of a mobile advertising platform for these devices and the expectation of customers regarding software that includes or supports an advertising component. iOS 4 supports iAd, the Company’s new mobile advertising platform, which enables applications on iPhone, iPad and iPod touch to feature media-rich advertisements within applications. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have a negative impact on the Company’s results of operations. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of investments are included in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, as reported in the Company’s Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of investments impact the Company’s net income only when such investments are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any investment is other-than-temporarily impaired due to changes in credit risk or other potential valuation concerns, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of an investment is less than its cost, the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto, and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it is more likely than not it will be required to sell, the investment before recovery of the investment’s amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment on whether an investment is other-than-temporarily impaired or not, could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular investment. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The industries in which the Company competes are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs, which would negatively affect its results of operations in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company records accruals for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company’s requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would negatively affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost of hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could materially affect the Company’s results of operations. The Company periodically provides updates to its applications and operating system software to maintain the software’s compliance with specifications. The estimated cost to develop such updates is accounted for as warranty cost that is recognized at the time related software revenue is recognized. Factors considered in determining appropriate accruals related to such updates include the number of units delivered, the number of updates expected to occur, and the historical cost and estimated future cost of the resources necessary to develop these updates. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with GAAP, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company only recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Note 8 “Commitments and Contingencies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. In accordance with GAAP, the Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In management’s opinion, the Company does not have a potential liability related to any current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or in the aggregate materially adversely affect its financial condition or operating results. However, the outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company are subject to significant uncertainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of these legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved against the Company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Net Sales Fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 each spanned 52 weeks. An additional week is included in the first fiscal quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. The following table summarizes net sales and Mac unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during the three years ended September 25, 2010 (in millions, except unit sales in thousands and per unit amounts): (a) Includes iMac, Mac mini, Mac Pro and Xserve product lines. (b) Includes MacBook, MacBook Air and MacBook Pro product lines. (c) Includes iTunes Store sales, iPod services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (d) Includes revenue recognized from iPhone sales, carrier agreements, services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPhone accessories. (e) Includes revenue recognized from iPad sales, services and Apple-branded and third-party iPad accessories. (f) Includes sales of displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories. (g) Includes sales of Apple-branded operating system and application software, third-party software, Mac and Internet services. (h) Derived by dividing total product-related net sales by total product-related unit sales. NM = Not Meaningful Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Net sales during 2010 increased $22.3 billion or 52% compared to 2009. Several factors contributed positively to these increases, including the following: • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $25.2 billion in 2010 representing an increase of $12.1 billion or 93% compared to 2009. Net sales of iPhone and related products and services accounted for 39% of the Company’s total net sales for the year. iPhone unit sales totaled 40 million in 2010, which represents an increase of 19.3 million or 93% compared to 2009. iPhone year-over-year growth was attributable primarily to continued growth from existing carriers, expanded distribution with new international carriers and resellers, and strong demand for iPhone 4, which was released in the U.S. in June 2010 and in many other countries over the remainder of 2010. As of September 25, 2010, the Company distributed iPhone in 89 countries through 166 carriers. • Net sales of iPad and related products and services were $5.0 billion and unit sales of iPad were 7.5 million during 2010. iPad was released in the U.S. in April 2010 and in various other countries over the remainder of 2010. As of September 25, 2010, the Company distributed iPad in 26 countries. The Company distributes iPad through its direct channels, certain cellular network carriers’ distribution channels and certain third-party resellers. Net sales of iPad and related products and services accounted for 8% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010, reflecting the strong demand for iPad during the five months following its release. • Mac net sales increased by $3.6 billion or 26% in 2010 compared to 2009, and Mac unit sales increased by 3.3 million or 31% in 2010 compared to 2009. Net sales per Mac unit sold decreased by 4% in 2010 compared to 2009 due primarily to lower average selling prices of Mac portable systems. Net sales of the Company’s Macs accounted for 27% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 compared to 32% in 2009. During 2010, net sales and unit sales of the Company’s Mac portable systems increased by 18% and 25%, respectively, primarily attributable to strong demand for MacBook Pro, which was updated in April 2010. Net sales and unit sales of the Company’s Mac desktop systems increased by 43% and 45%, respectively, as a result of higher sales of iMac, which was updated in July 2010. • Net sales of other music related products and services increased $912 million or 23% during 2010 compared to 2009. This increase was due primarily to growth of the iTunes Store which generated total net sales of $4.1 billion for 2010. The results of the iTunes Store reflect growth of the iTunes App Store, continued growth in the installed base of iPhone, iPad, and iPod customers, and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale and rent via the iTunes Store. The Company continues to expand its iTunes content and applications offerings around the world. Net sales of other music related products and services accounted for 8% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010. • Net sales of iPods increased $183 million or 2% during 2010, while iPod unit sales declined by 7% during 2010 compared to 2009. Net sales per iPod unit sold increased by 10% to $164 in 2010 compared to 2009, due to a shift in product mix toward iPod touch. iPod touch had strong growth in each of the Company’s reportable operating segments. Net sales of iPods accounted for 13% of the Company’s total net sales for the year compared to 19% in 2009. Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Net sales during 2009 increased $5.4 billion or 14% compared to 2008. Several factors contributed positively to these increases, including the following: • iPhone revenue and net sales of related products and services amounted to $13.0 billion in 2009, an increase of $6.3 billion or 93% compared to 2008. The year-over-year iPhone revenue growth is largely attributable to the year-over-year increase in iPhone handset unit sales. iPhone handset unit sales totaled 20.7 million during 2009, which represents an increase of 9.1 million or 78% during 2009 compared to 2008. This growth is attributed primarily to expanded distribution and strong overall demand for iPhones. iPhone 3GS was released in the U.S. on June 19, 2009 and in many other countries over the remainder of 2009. • Net sales of other music-related products and services increased $696 million or 21% during 2009 compared to 2008. The increase was due predominantly to increased net sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store, which experienced double-digit growth in each of the Company’s geographic segments during 2009 compared to the same period in 2008. The Company believes this is attributable primarily to continued interest in and growth of the iTunes App Store, continued growth in the Company’s base of iPhone, iPad, and iPod customers, and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale and rent via the iTunes Store Partially offsetting the favorable factors discussed above, net sales during 2009 were negatively impacted by certain factors, including the following: • Net sales of iPods decreased $1.1 billion or 12% during 2009 compared to 2008. iPod unit sales decreased by 1% during 2009 compared to 2008. Net sales per iPod unit sold decreased 11% to $149 in 2009 compared to 2008, resulting from lower average selling prices across all of the iPod product lines, due primarily to price reductions taken with the introduction of new iPods in September 2009 and September 2008 and a stronger U.S. dollar, offset partially by a higher mix of iPod touch sales. • Mac net sales declined 3% during 2009 compared to 2008, while Mac unit sales increased by 7% over the same period. Net sales per Mac unit sold decreased by 10% during 2009 compared to 2008, due primarily to lower average selling prices across all Mac portable and desktop systems and a stronger U.S. dollar. Net sales of Macs accounted for 32% of the Company’s total net sales for 2009. During 2009, Mac portable systems net sales and unit sales increased by 9% and 20%, respectively, compared to 2008. This growth was driven by strong demand for MacBook Pro, which was updated in June 2009 and October 2008, and which experienced double-digit net sales and unit growth in each of the Company’s reportable operating segments compared to the same period in 2008. The Company also had a higher mix of Mac portable systems sales, which is consistent with overall personal computer market trends. Net sales and unit sales of the Company’s Mac desktop systems decreased by 23% and 14%, respectively, during 2009 compared to 2008. The decrease in net sales of Mac desktop systems was due mainly to a shift in product mix towards lower-priced desktops, lower average selling prices across all Mac desktop systems and a stronger U.S. dollar. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating and reporting segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Japan, Asia-Pacific and Retail operations. The Americas, Europe, Japan and Asia-Pacific reportable segment results do not include the results of the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Asia-Pacific segment includes Australia and Asia, but does not include Japan. The Retail segment operates Apple retail stores in 11 countries, including the U.S. Each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Note 9, “Segment Information and Geographic Data” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Americas During 2010, net sales in the Americas segment increased $5.5 billion or 29% compared to 2009. This increase in net sales was driven by increased iPhone revenue, strong demand for iPad, continued demand for Mac desktop and portable systems, and higher sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store. Americas Mac net sales and unit sales increased 18% and 21%, respectively, during 2010 compared to 2009, largely due to strong demand for MacBook Pro. The Americas segment represented 37% and 44% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively. During 2009, net sales in the Americas segment increased $2.4 billion or 15% compared to 2008. The increase in net sales during 2009 was attributable to the significant year-over-year increase in iPhone revenue, higher sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store, and increased sales of Mac portable systems, partially offset by a decrease in sales of Mac desktop systems and iPods. Americas Mac net sales decreased 6% due primarily to lower average selling prices, while Mac unit sales increased by 4% on a year-over-year basis. The increase in Mac unit sales was due primarily to strong demand for the MacBook Pro. The Americas segment represented approximately 44% of the Company’s total net sales in both 2009 and 2008. Europe During 2010, net sales in Europe increased $6.9 billion or 58% compared to 2009. The growth in net sales was due mainly to a significant increase in iPhone revenue attributable to continued growth from existing carriers and country and carrier expansion, increased sales of Mac desktop and portable systems and strong demand for iPad, partially offset by a stronger U.S. dollar. Europe Mac net sales and unit sales increased 32% and 36%, respectively, during the year due to strong demand for MacBook Pro and iMac. The Europe segment represented 29% and 28% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively. During 2009, net sales in Europe increased $2.6 billion or 28% compared to 2008. The increase in net sales was due mainly to increased iPhone revenue and strong sales of Mac portable systems, offset partially by lower net sales of Mac desktop systems, iPods, and a stronger U.S. dollar. Mac unit sales increased 13% in 2009 compared to 2008, which was driven primarily by increased sales of Mac portable systems, particularly MacBook Pro, while total Mac net sales declined as a result of lower average selling prices across all Mac products. iPod net sales decreased year-over-year as a result of lower average selling prices, partially offset by increased unit sales of the higher priced iPod touch. The Europe segment represented 28% and 25% of total net sales in 2009 and 2008, respectively. Japan During 2010, Japan’s net sales increased $1.7 billion or 75% compared to 2009. The primary contributors to this growth were significant year-over-year increases in iPhone revenue, strong demand for iPad, and to a lesser extent strength in the Japanese Yen. Mac net sales increased by 8% driven by a 22% increase in unit sales due primarily to strong demand for MacBook Pro and iMac, partially offset by lower average selling prices in Japan on a year-over-year basis. The Japan segment represented 6% and 5% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010 and 2009, respectively. Japan’s net sales increased $551 million or 32% in 2009 compared to 2008. The primary contributors to this growth were increased iPhone revenue, stronger demand for certain Mac portable systems and iPods, and strength in the Japanese Yen, partially offset by decreased sales of Mac desktop systems. Net sales and unit sales of Mac portable systems increased during 2009 compared to 2008, driven primarily by stronger demand for MacBook Pro. Net sales and unit sales of iPods increased during 2009 compared to 2008, driven by strong demand for iPod touch and iPod nano. The Japan segment represented approximately 5% of the Company’s total net sales in both 2009 and 2008. Asia-Pacific Net sales in Asia-Pacific increased $5.1 billion or 160% during 2010 compared to 2009. The significant growth in Asia-Pacific net sales was due mainly to increased iPhone revenue, which was primarily attributable to country and carrier expansion and continued growth from existing carriers. Asia-Pacific net sales were also favorably affected by strong demand for Mac portable and desktop systems and for iPad. Particularly strong year-over-year growth was experienced in China, Korea and Australia. The Asia-Pacific segment represented 13% and 7% of the Company’s total net sales for 2010 and 2009, respectively. Net sales in Asia-Pacific increased $493 million or 18% during 2009 compared to 2008 reflecting strong growth in sales of iPhone and Mac portable systems, offset partially by a decline in sales of iPods and Mac desktop systems, as well as a strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and other Asian currencies. Mac net sales and unit sales grew in the Asia-Pacific region by 4% and 17%, respectively, due to increased sales of the MacBook Pro. The Asia-Pacific segment represented approximately 7% of the Company’s total net sales in both 2009 and 2008. Retail Retail net sales increased $3.1 billion or 47% during 2010 compared to 2009. The increase in net sales was driven primarily by strong demand for iPad, increased sales of Mac desktop and portable systems and a significant year-over-year increase in iPhone revenue. Mac net sales and unit sales grew in the Retail segment by 25% and 35%, respectively, during 2010. The Company opened 44 new retail stores during the year, 28 of which were international stores, ending the year with 317 stores open compared to 273 stores at the end of 2009. With an average of 288 stores and 254 stores opened during 2010 and 2009, respectively, average revenue per store increased to $34.1 million in 2010, compared to $26.2 million in 2009. The Retail segment represented 15% and 16% of the Company’s total net sales in 2010 and 2009, respectively. Retail net sales decreased $636 million or 9% during 2009 compared to 2008. The decline in net sales was driven largely by a decrease in net sales of iPhones, iPods and Mac desktop systems, offset partially by strong demand for Mac portable systems. The year-over-year decline in Retail net sales was attributable to continued third-party channel expansion, particularly in the U.S. where most of the Company’s stores are located, and also reflects the challenging consumer-spending environment in 2009. The Company opened 26 new retail stores during 2009, including 14 international stores, ending the year with 273 stores open. This compares to 247 stores open as of September 27, 2008. With an average of 254 stores and 211 stores opened during 2009 and 2008, respectively, average revenue per store decreased to $26.2 million for 2009 from $34.6 million in 2008. The Retail segment reported operating income of $2.4 billion during 2010 and $1.7 billion during both 2009 and 2008. The increase in Retail operating income during 2010 compared to 2009 was attributable to higher overall net sales. Despite the decline in Retail net sales during 2009 compared to 2008, the Retail segment’s operating income was flat at $1.7 billion in 2009 compared to 2008 due primarily to a higher gross margin percentage in 2009 consistent with that experienced by the overall company. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital asset purchases associated with the Retail segment since its inception totaled $2.2 billion through the end of 2010. As of September 25, 2010, the Retail segment had approximately 26,500 full-time equivalent employees and had outstanding lease commitments associated with retail space and related facilities of $1.7 billion. The Company would incur substantial costs if it were to close multiple retail stores and such costs could adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Gross Margin Gross margin for the three years ended September 25, 2010, are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): The gross margin percentage in 2010 was 39.4% compared to 40.1% in 2009. This decline in gross margin is primarily attributable to new products that have higher cost structures, including iPad, partially offset by a more favorable sales mix of iPhone, which has a higher gross margin than the Company average. The gross margin percentage in 2009 was 40.1% compared to 35.2% in 2008. The primary contributors to the increase in 2009 as compared to 2008 were a favorable sales mix toward products with higher gross margins and lower commodity and other product costs, which were partially offset by product price reductions. The Company expects its gross margin percentage to decrease in future periods compared to levels achieved during 2010 and anticipates gross margin levels of about 36% in the first quarter of 2011. This expected decline is largely due to a higher mix of new and innovative products that have higher cost structures and deliver greater value to customers, and expected and potential future component cost and other cost increases. The foregoing statements regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage are forward-looking and could differ from anticipated levels because of several factors, including but not limited to certain of those set forth below in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” under the subheading “Future operating results depend upon the Company’s ability to obtain key components including but not limited to microprocessors, NAND flash memory, DRAM and LCDs at favorable prices and in sufficient quantities,” which is incorporated herein by reference. There can be no assurance that targeted gross margin percentage levels will be achieved. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions and expected and potential increases in the cost of key components including but not limited to microprocessors, NAND flash memory, DRAM and LCDs, as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to these competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for the three years ended September 25, 2010, are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development Expense (“R&D”) R&D expense increased 34% or $449 million to $1.8 billion in 2010 compared to 2009. This increase was due primarily to an increase in headcount and related expenses in the current year to support expanded R&D activities. Also contributing to this increase in R&D expense in 2010 was the capitalization in 2009 of software development costs of $71 million related to Mac OS X Snow Leopard. Although total R&D expense increased 34% during 2010, it declined as a percentage of net sales given the 52% year-over-year increase in net sales in 2010. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to make further investments in R&D to remain competitive. R&D expense increased 20% or $224 million to $1.3 billion in 2009 compared to 2008. This increase was due primarily to an increase in headcount in 2009 to support expanded R&D activities and higher stock-based compensation expenses. Additionally, $71 million of software development costs were capitalized related to Mac OS X Snow Leopard and excluded from R&D expense during 2009, compared to $11 million of software development costs capitalized during 2008. Although total R&D expense increased 20% during 2009, it remained relatively flat as a percentage of net sales given the 14% increase in revenue in 2009. Selling, General and Administrative Expense (“SG&A”) SG&A expense increased $1.4 billion or 33% to $5.5 billion in 2010 compared to 2009. This increase was due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment, higher spending on marketing and advertising programs, increased stock-based compensation expenses and variable costs associated with the overall growth of the Company’s net sales. SG&A expenses increased $388 million or 10% to $4.1 billion in 2009 compared to 2008. This increase was due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, higher stock-based compensation expense and higher spending on marketing and advertising. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for the three years ended September 25, 2010, are as follows (in millions): Total other income and expense decreased $171 million or 52% to $155 million during 2010 compared to $326 million and $620 million in 2009 and 2008, respectively. The overall decrease in other income and expense is attributable to the significant declines in interest rates on a year-over-year basis, partially offset by the Company’s higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 0.75%, 1.43% and 3.44% during 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Additionally the Company incurred higher premium expenses on its foreign exchange option contracts, which further reduced the total other income and expense. During 2010, 2009 and 2008, the Company had no debt outstanding and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense. Provision for Income Taxes The Company’s effective tax rates were 24%, 32% and 32% for 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The Company’s effective rates for these periods differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. The lower effective tax rate in 2010 as compared to 2009 is due primarily to an increase in foreign earnings on which U.S. income taxes have not been provided as such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. As of September 25, 2010, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $2.4 billion, and deferred tax liabilities of $5.0 billion. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of a valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for the years 2004 through 2006 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company has contested certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. The IRS is currently examining the years 2007 through 2009. All IRS audit issues for years prior to 2004 have been resolved. During the third quarter of 2010, the Company reached a tax settlement with the IRS for the years 2002 through 2003. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the three years ended September 25, 2010 (in millions): As of September 25, 2010, the Company had $51 billion in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, an increase of $17 billion from September 26, 2009. The principal component of this net increase was the cash generated by operating activities of $18.6 billion, which was partially offset by payments for acquisition of property, plant and equipment of $2 billion and payments made in connection with business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $638 million. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly rated securities, generally with a minimum rating of single-A or equivalent. As of September 25, 2010 and September 26, 2009, $30.8 billion and $17.4 billion, respectively, of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Capital Assets The Company’s capital expenditures were $2.6 billion during 2010, consisting of approximately $404 million for retail store facilities and $2.2 billion for other capital expenditures, including product tooling and manufacturing process equipment and corporate facilities and infrastructure. The Company’s actual cash payments for capital expenditures during 2010 were $2 billion. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $4.0 billion for capital expenditures during 2011, including approximately $600 million for retail store facilities and approximately $3.4 billion for product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, and corporate facilities and infrastructure, including information systems hardware, software and enhancements. Historically the Company has opened between 25 and 50 new retail stores per year. During 2011, the Company expects to open 40 to 50 new stores, over half of which are expected to be located outside of the U.S. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 25, 2010 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet (in millions): Lease Commitments As of September 25, 2010, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of $2.1 billion, $1.7 billion of which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. The Company’s major facility leases are typically for terms not exceeding 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms not exceeding five additional years. Leases for retail space are for terms ranging from five to 20 years, the majority of which are for ten years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. As of September 25, 2010, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of $8.2 billion. The Company has entered into prepaid long-term supply agreements to secure the supply of certain inventory components, which generally expire between 2011 and 2015. In August 2010, the Company entered into a long-term supply agreement under which it has committed to prepay $500 million in 2011. These prepayments will be applied to certain inventory component purchases made over the life of each respective agreement. Other Obligations Other outstanding obligations were $1.1 billion as of September 25, 2010, which related to advertising, research and development, product tooling and manufacturing process equipment, Internet and telecommunications services and other obligations. The Company’s other non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets consist primarily of deferred tax liabilities, gross unrecognized tax benefits and the related gross interest and penalties. As of September 25, 2010, the Company had non-current deferred tax liabilities of $4.3 billion. Additionally, as of September 25, 2010, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $943 million and an additional $247 million for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in connection with these tax liabilities; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnifications The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a liability related to unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would materially adversely affect its financial condition or operating results. Therefore, the Company did not record a liability for infringement costs as of either September 25, 2010 or September 26, 2009. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations, and payments made under these agreements historically have not materially adversely affected the Company’s financial condition or operating results. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled “Risk Factors” above, which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets personal computers, mobile communication devices, and portable digital music and video players and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions. The Company’s products and services include the Mac line of desktop and portable computers, iPhone, the iPod line of portable digital music and video players, Apple TV, Xserve, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the Mac OS X operating system, third-party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company sells its products worldwide through its online stores, its retail stores, its direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Mac, iPhone and iPod compatible products, including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and peripherals through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumer, small and mid-sized business (“SMB”), education, enterprise, government, and creative markets. The Company is focused on providing innovative products and solutions to consumer, SMB, education, enterprise, government and creative customers that greatly enhance their evolving digital lifestyles and work environments. The Company’s overall business strategy is to control the design and development of the hardware and software for all of its products, including the personal computer, mobile communications and consumer electronics devices. The Company’s business strategy leverages its unique ability to design and develop its own operating system, hardware, application software, and services to provide its customers new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative industrial design. The Company believes continual investment in research and development is critical to the development and enhancement of innovative products and technologies. In conjunction with its strategy, the Company continues to build and host a robust platform for the discovery and delivery of third-party digital content and applications through the iTunes Store. Most recently the Company launched the App Store that allows users to browse, search for, and purchase third-party applications through either a Mac or Windows-based computer or by wirelessly downloading directly to an iPhone or iPod touch. The Company also desires to support a community for the development of third-party products that complement the Company’s offerings through its developer programs. The Company is therefore uniquely positioned to offer superior and well-integrated digital lifestyle and productivity solutions. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including personal computers with its Mac line of personal computers, mobile communications with iPhone, consumer electronics with its iPod product families, and distribution of third-party digital content and applications through its online iTunes Store. While the Company is widely recognized as a leading innovator in the personal computer, mobile communications and consumer electronics markets as well as a leader in the emerging market for distribution of digital content and applications, these markets are highly competitive and subject to aggressive pricing. To remain competitive, the Company believes that increased investment in research and development and marketing and advertising is necessary to maintain or expand its position in the markets where it competes. The Company’s research and development spending is focused on further developing its existing Mac line of personal computers, its operating system, application software, iPhone and iPods; developing new digital lifestyle consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new product areas and technologies. The Company also believes increased investment in marketing and advertising programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness. The Company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration, demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available on Mac computers, and demonstrate the compatibility of the Mac with the Windows platform and networks. The Company further believes providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by opening its own retail stores in the U.S. and in international markets. The Company had 273 stores open as of September 26, 2009. The Company has also invested in programs to enhance reseller sales, including the Apple Sales Consultant Program, which places Apple employees and contractors at selected third-party reseller locations, and the Apple Premium Reseller Program, through which independently run businesses focus on the Apple platform and provide a high level of customer service and product expertise. The Company believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an efficient way to demonstrate the advantages of its Mac computers and other products over those of its competitors. The Company also sells to customers directly through its online stores around the world and through its direct sales force. The Company distributes iPhone in over 80 countries, through its direct channels, its cellular network carriers’ distribution channels and certain third-party resellers. The Company has signed multi-year agreements with various cellular network carriers authorizing them to distribute and provide cellular network services for iPhones. These agreements are generally not exclusive with a specific carrier, except in the U.S., Germany, Spain, Ireland and certain other countries. The Company’s iPods are sold through a significant number of distribution points to provide broad access. iPods can be purchased in certain department stores, member-only warehouse stores, large retail chains and specialty retail stores, as well as through the channels for Mac distribution listed above. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, valuation of marketable securities, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, third-party digital content and applications, peripherals, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue for software products (operating system software and applications software), or any product that is considered to be software-related, in accordance with industry specific accounting guidance for software and software related transactions (e.g., Mac computers, iPhones and iPod portable digital music and video players). For products that are not software or software-related, (e.g., third-party digital content sold on the iTunes Store and certain Mac, iPhone and iPod supplies and accessories), the Company recognizes revenue pursuant to various revenue-related GAAP as described below. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers recognition of revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable, revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable and all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met. For both iPhone and Apple TV, the Company has indicated it may from time-to-time provide future unspecified features and additional software products free of charge to customers. Accordingly, iPhone handsets and Apple TV sales are accounted for under subscription accounting in accordance with GAAP. As such, the revenue and associated cost of sales are deferred at the time of sale, and are both recognized on a straight-line basis over the currently estimated 24-month economic lives of these products, with any loss recognized at the time of sale. If the Company’s estimated economic life of a product accounted for under subscription accounting changes, the future rate at which deferred revenue and deferred costs are recognized in the Company’s results of operations will change. Costs incurred by the Company for engineering, sales, marketing and warranty are expensed as incurred. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have a negative impact on the Company’s results of operations. Valuation and Impairment of Marketable Securities The Company’s investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of investments are included in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, as reported in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Changes in the fair value of investments impact the Company’s net income only when such investments are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. Realized gains and losses on the sale of securities are determined by specific identification of each security’s cost basis. The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if any investment is other-than-temporarily impaired due to changes in credit risk or other potential valuation concerns, which would require the Company to record an impairment charge in the period any such determination is made. In making this judgment, the Company evaluates, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of an investment is less than its cost, the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto, and the Company’s intent to sell, or whether it is more likely than not it will be required to sell, the investment before recovery of the investment’s amortized cost basis. The Company’s assessment on whether an investment is other-than-temporarily impaired or not, could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular investment. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company distributes its products through third-party distributors, cellular network carriers, and resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and enterprise customers. The Company generally does not require collateral from its customers; however, the Company will require collateral in certain instances to limit credit risk. In addition, when possible the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in Latin America, Europe, Asia, and Australia, or by requiring third-party financing, loans or leases to support credit exposure. These credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company generally does not assume any recourse or credit-risk-sharing related to any of these arrangements. However, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral, third-party financing arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company’s distribution and retail channel partners. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management’s assessment of the ability to collect specific customer accounts and includes consideration of the credit-worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. The Company records an allowance to reduce the specific receivables to the amount that it reasonably believes to be collectible. The Company also records an allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors, including historical experience with bad debts, the general economic environment, the financial condition of the Company’s distribution channels, and the aging of such receivables. If there is a deterioration of a major customer’s financial condition, if the Company becomes aware of additional information related to the credit-worthiness of a major customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Company may have to adjust its allowance for doubtful accounts, which would affect its results of operations in the period the adjustments are made. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The personal computer, mobile communications and consumer electronics industries are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs, which would negatively affect its results of operations in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company records accruals for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company’s requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional accruals for cancellation fees that would negatively affect its results of operations in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost of hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. For products accounted for under subscription accounting, the Company recognizes warranty expense as incurred. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could materially affect the Company’s results of operations. The Company periodically provides updates to its applications and operating system software to maintain the software’s compliance with specifications. The estimated cost to develop such updates is accounted for as warranty cost that is recognized at the time related software revenue is recognized. Factors considered in determining appropriate accruals related to such updates include the number of units delivered, the number of updates expected to occur, and the historical cost and estimated future cost of the resources necessary to develop these updates. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with GAAP, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company recognizes and measures uncertain tax positions in accordance with GAAP, whereby the Company only recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Note 8, “Commitments and Contingencies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. In accordance with GAAP, the Company records a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In management’s opinion, the Company does not have a potential liability related to any current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or in the aggregate materially adversely affect its financial condition or operating results. However, the outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company are subject to significant uncertainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of these legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved against the Company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Net Sales Fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 spanned 52 weeks. An additional week is included in the first fiscal quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. The following table summarizes net sales and Mac unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during the three years ended September 26, 2009 (in millions, except unit sales in thousands and per unit amounts): (a) Other Segments include Asia Pacific and FileMaker. (b) Includes iMac, Mac mini, Mac Pro and Xserve product lines. (c) Includes MacBook, MacBook Air and MacBook Pro product lines. (d) Consists of iTunes Store sales, iPod services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (e) Derived from handset sales, carrier agreements, and Apple-branded and third-party iPhone accessories. (f) Includes sales of displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories. (g) Includes sales of Apple-branded operating system and application software, third-party software, AppleCare and Internet services. (h) Derived by dividing total Mac net sales by total Mac unit sales. (i) Derived by dividing total iPod net sales by total iPod unit sales. NM = Not Meaningful Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Net sales during 2009 increased $4.1 billion or 12% compared to 2008. Several factors contributed positively to these increases, including the following: • iPhone revenue and net sales of related products and services amounted to $6.8 billion in 2009, an increase of $4.9 billion or 266% compared to 2008. iPhone handset unit sales totaled 20.7 million during 2009, which represents an increase of 9.1 million or 78% during 2009 compared to 2008. This growth is attributed primarily to expanded distribution and strong overall demand for iPhones. iPhone 3GS was released in the U.S. on June 19, 2009 and in many other countries over the remainder of 2009. iPhone revenue includes the portion of handset revenue recognized in the relevant period in accordance with subscription accounting over the product’s currently estimated 24-month economic life, as well as revenue from sales of iPhone accessories and carrier agreements. The year-over-year iPhone revenue growth is also largely attributable to the year-over-year increase in iPhone handset unit sales in both 2009 and 2008, which generated significant amounts of deferred revenue that is being recognized over the iPhone’s estimated economic life. • Net sales of other music-related products and services increased $696 million or 21% during 2009 compared to 2008. The increase was due predominantly to increased net sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store, which experienced double-digit growth in each of the Company’s geographic segments during 2009 compared to the same period in 2008. The Company believes this continued growth is the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading third-party digital content and applications, continued growth in its customer base of iPod and iPhone customers, the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale and rent via the iTunes Store, and the continued interest in and growth of the App Store. The Company continues to expand its iTunes content and applications offerings around the world. Partially offsetting the favorable factors discussed above, net sales during 2009 were negatively impacted by certain factors, including the following: • Mac net sales declined 3% during 2009 compared to 2008, although Mac unit sales increased by 7% over the same period. Net sales per Mac unit sold decreased by 10% during 2009 compared to 2008, due primarily to lower average selling prices across all Mac portable and desktop systems and a stronger U.S. dollar. Net sales of Macs accounted for 38% of the Company’s total net sales for 2009. During 2009, Mac portable systems net sales and unit sales increased by 9% and 20%, respectively, compared to 2008. This growth was driven by strong demand for MacBook Pro, which was updated in June 2009 and October 2008, and experienced double digit net sales and unit growth in each of the Company’s reportable operating segments compared to the same period in 2008. The Company also had a higher product mix of portable systems, which is consistent with the overall market trends. However, net sales and unit sales of the Company’s Mac desktop systems decreased by 23% and 14%, respectively, during 2009 compared to 2008. The decrease in net sales of Mac desktop systems was due mainly to a shift in product mix towards lower-priced desktops, lower average selling prices across all Mac desktop systems and a stronger U.S. dollar. • Net sales of iPods decreased $1.1 billion or 12% during 2009 compared to 2008. iPod unit sales decreased slightly by 1% during 2009 compared to 2008. Net sales per iPod unit sold decreased 11% to $149 in 2009 compared to 2008, resulting from lower average selling prices across all of the iPod product lines, which were due primarily to price reductions taken with the introduction of new iPods in September 2009 and September 2008 and a stronger U.S. dollar, offset partially by a higher product mix of iPod touch. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Net sales during 2008 increased 35% or $8.5 billion from 2007. Several factors contributed to these increases including the following: • Mac net sales increased $4.0 billion or 38% during 2008 compared to 2007, while Mac unit sales increased by 2.7 million units or 38%. Net sales related to the Company’s Mac shipments accounted for 44% of the Company’s total net revenue. Higher Mac unit sales, which contributed to the increases in net sales, were driven by higher sales of all of the Company’s Mac portable products as well as the popularity of the iMac, which experienced strong growth in net sales and unit sales in all of the Company’s reportable segments. Unit sales of the Company’s Mac portable products accounted for 62% of the Company’s personal computer shipments in both 2008 and 2007. Net sales and unit sales of the Company’s Mac portable products both increased by 38% during 2008 compared to 2007. This growth was attributable to strong demand for all the Mac portable products, particularly the MacBook, which had double-digit growth in all of the Company’s operating segments, and the addition of the MacBook Air, which was introduced to the Company’s Mac portable product line in January 2008. Growth of the Company’s Mac desktop systems was also strong, with increased net sales and unit sales of 39% and 37%, respectively, during 2008 due primarily to strong sales of the iMac in all of the Company’s operating segments. • Net sales of iPods increased $848 million or 10% during 2008 compared to 2007 whereas unit sales of iPods increased 6% compared to 2007. The iPod unit growth was due to strong demand for the iPod touch, and to a lesser extent, higher unit sales of the iPod shuffle due to a price reduction in February 2008. iPod net sales grew faster than iPod unit sales due to higher average selling prices caused by a shift in overall iPod product mix to the higher priced iPod touch. • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $1.8 billion for 2008, with iPhone handset unit sales totaling 11.6 million. Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $123 million in 2007, which represented sales for one fiscal quarter. iPhone revenue includes the portion of handset revenue recognized in the relevant period in accordance with subscription accounting over the product’s currently estimated 24-month economic life, as well as revenue from sales of iPhone accessories and from carrier agreements. • Net sales of other music related products and services increased $844 million or 34% during 2008 compared to 2007, due primarily to significantly increased net sales from the iTunes Store in each of the Company’s geographic segments. The Company believes this success is the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading third-party digital content, the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale and rent via the iTunes Store, and the launch of the iTunes App Store. The Company continues to expand its iTunes content offerings around the world. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Japan and Retail. The Americas, Europe and Japan reportable segments do not include activities related to the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Retail segment operates Apple-owned retail stores in the U.S. and in international markets. Each reportable geographic operating segment and the Retail operating segment provide similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Note 9, “Segment Information and Geographic Data” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Americas During 2009, net sales in the Americas segment increased $1.6 billion or 11% compared to 2008. The increase in net sales during 2009 was attributable to the significant year-over-year increase in iPhone revenue, higher sales of third-party digital content and applications from the iTunes Store, and increased sales of Mac portable systems, which were partially offset by a decrease in sales of Mac desktop systems and iPods. Americas Mac net sales decreased 6% due primarily to lower average selling prices, while Mac unit sales increased by 4% on a year-over-year basis. The increase in Mac unit sales was due primarily to strong demand for the MacBook Pro, which was updated in June 2009 and October 2008. The Americas segment represented approximately 44% and 45% of the Company’s total net sales in 2009 and 2008, respectively. During 2008, net sales in the Americas segment increased $3.0 billion or 26% compared to 2007. The primary drivers of this growth were the significant year-over-year increase in sales of the iPod touch, Mac portable systems, content from the iTunes Store, and iPhone. The Company began shipping iPhone in June 2007 and the growth in iPhone sales in 2008 resulted from a full year of iPhone shipments as well as stronger demand for iPhones in the fourth quarter of 2008. The increase in Mac net sales of $1.3 billion or 30% and Mac unit sales of 961 million or 32% is attributable to growth in sales of all of the Mac portable systems, particularly the MacBook, and higher sales of the iMac. Net sales of iPods increased due to a shift in product mix toward higher priced iPods, particularly the iPod touch, which was upgraded in June 2008. In 2008, the Americas segment represented 45% of the Company’s total net sales as compared to 48% in the same period of 2007. Europe During 2009, net sales in Europe increased $1.7 billion or 23% compared to 2008. The increase in net sales was due mainly to increased iPhone revenue and Mac portable systems, offset partially by lower net sales of Mac desktop systems, iPods, and a stronger U.S. dollar. Mac unit sales increased 13% in 2009 compared to 2008, which was driven primarily by increased sales of Mac portable systems, particularly MacBook Pro, while total Mac net sales declined as a result of lower average selling prices across all Mac products. Although iPod net sales decreased in Europe year-over-year as a result of lower average selling prices, iPod unit sales increased due to iPod touch and market share increases. The Europe segment represented 26% and 23% of total net sales in 2009 and 2008, respectively. Europe’s net sales and Mac unit sales increased 40% and 39%, respectively, during 2008 compared to 2007. The main drivers of this growth were strong sales of Mac portable systems and iMac, increased sales from the iTunes Store, and iPhone. Also contributing to the increase in net sales were higher iPod net sales due primarily to the iPod touch, which was upgraded in June 2008. Sales of Mac portable products increased due to stronger demand for the MacBook Pro and the MacBook, both updated in February 2008, as well as sales of the MacBook Air, introduced in January 2008. Mac desktop sales also increased due primarily to the popularity of the iMac, which was updated in April 2008. The Europe segment represented 23% of total net sales in 2008, consistent with 2007. Japan Japan’s net sales increased $322 million or 21% in 2009 compared to 2008. The key contributors to this growth were increased iPhone revenue, stronger demand for certain Mac portable systems and iPods, and strength in the Japanese Yen, partially offset by decreased sales of Mac desktop systems. Net sales and unit sales of Mac portable systems increased during 2009 compared to 2008, driven primarily by stronger demand for MacBook Pro, which was updated in June 2009 and October 2008. Net sales and unit sales of iPods increased during 2009 compared to 2008, driven by strong demand for iPod touch and iPod nano. Japan net sales increased $427 million or 39% in 2008 compared to 2007. The primary contributors to the growth in net sales were increases in sales of iPods, iMac, Mac portable systems, and strong sales from the iTunes Store. Net sales, unit sales and the average selling price of iPods increased during 2008 compared to 2007, driven by strong demand for iPod touch and iPod nano. Additionally, Mac net sales and unit sales grew 42% and 29%, respectively, in 2008 compared to 2007 due to increases in sales of iMac and Mac portable systems, particularly MacBook, as well as the introduction of MacBook Air in January 2008. Retail Retail net sales increased $259 million or 4% during 2009 compared to 2008. The growth in net sales was driven largely by increased iPhone revenue and Mac portable systems, offset partially by a decrease in sales of iPods and Mac desktop systems. The Company opened 26 new retail stores during 2009, including a total of 14 international stores, ending the year with 273 stores open. This compares to 247 stores open as of September 27, 2008 and 197 open stores as of September 29, 2007. The year-over-year growth rate of Retail net sales was less than the increase in the average number of stores open during the same period, which the Company believes reflects the challenging consumer-spending environment and continued third-party channel expansion, particularly in the U.S. where most of its stores are located. With an average of 254 stores and 211 stores opened during 2009 and 2008, respectively, average revenue per store decreased to $25.9 million for 2009 from $29.9 million in 2008. The Retail segment’s net sales grew by 53% during 2008 compared to 2007, due in large part to increased sales of Mac portable and desktop systems, strong demand for the iPhone and iPod touch, and new store openings. The Company opened 50 new retail stores during 2008, bringing the total number of open stores to 247 as of September 27, 2008. This compares to 197 open stores as of September 29, 2007. With an average of 211 stores and 178 stores opened during 2008 and 2007, respectively, average revenue per store increased to $29.9 million for 2008 from $23.1 million in 2007. As measured by the Company’s operating segment reporting, the Retail segment reported operating income of $1.4 billion during 2009, as compared to operating income of $1.3 billion and $875 million during 2008 and 2007, respectively. This increase in operating income in 2009 was driven by increased total Retail net sales attributable to a 20% increase in average stores open and higher gross margin percentage consistent with that experienced Company-wide. The Retail segment’s operating income increased by $462 million during 2008 as compared to 2007 due primarily to the significant Retail net sales growth of 53% as compared to 2007. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital asset purchases associated with the Retail segment were $369 million in 2009, bringing the total capital asset purchases since inception of the Retail segment to $1.8 billion. As of September 26, 2009, the Retail segment had approximately 16,500 full-time equivalent employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with retail store space and related facilities of $1.5 billion. The Company would incur substantial costs if it were to close multiple retail stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Other Segments The Company’s Other Segments, which consist of its Asia Pacific and FileMaker operations, experienced an increase in net sales of $165 million, or 7%, during 2009 as compared to 2008 reflecting strong growth in sales of iPhone and Mac portable systems offset partially by a decline in sales related to iPods and Mac desktop systems in the Asia Pacific region, as well as a strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and other Asian currencies. Mac net sales and unit sales grew in the Asia Pacific region by 4% and 17%, respectively, due to increased sales of the MacBook Pro. The Company’s Other Segments experienced an increase in net sales of $707 million, or 40% during 2008 as compared to 2007. These increases are related primarily to strong growth in sales of all Mac portable systems, iPods, the iMac, and content from the iTunes Store in the Company’s Asia Pacific region. Sales from the iTunes Store in the Company’s Asia Pacific region grew 109% compared to 2007. Gross Margin Gross margin for the three years ended September 26, 2009, are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): The gross margin percentage in 2009 was 36.0% compared to 34.3% in 2008. The primary drivers of the increase in 2009 as compared to 2008 were significantly lower commodity and other product costs and a favorable sales mix toward products with higher gross margins, which were partially offset by product price reductions. Gross margin percentage was relatively flat in 2008 as compared to 2007. The Company expects its gross margin percentage to decrease in future periods compared to levels achieved during 2009 and anticipates gross margin levels of about 34% in the first quarter of 2010. This expected decline is due largely to the anticipated impact of product transitions, flat or reduced pricing on new and innovative products that have higher cost structures, and both expected and potential future cost increases for key components. The foregoing statements regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage are forward-looking and could differ from anticipated levels because of several factors, including but not limited to certain of those set forth below in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” under the subheading “Future operating results depend upon the Company’s ability to obtain key components including but not limited to microprocessors, NAND flash memory, DRAM and LCDs at favorable prices and in sufficient quantities,” which is incorporated herein by reference. There can be no assurance that targeted gross margin percentage levels will be achieved. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions and expected increases in the cost of key components including but not limited to microprocessors, NAND flash memory, dynamic random access memory (“DRAM”) and liquid crystal displays (“LCDs”), as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to these competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for the three years ended September 26, 2009, are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development (“R&D”) R&D expenditures increased 20% or $224 million to $1.3 billion in 2009 compared to 2008. These increases were due primarily to an increase in headcount and higher stock-based compensation expenses in the current year to support expanded R&D activities. In addition, $71 million of software development costs were capitalized related to Mac OS X Snow Leopard and excluded from R&D expense during 2009, compared to $11 million of software development costs capitalized during 2008. Although total R&D expense increased 20% during 2009, it remained relatively flat as a percentage of net sales given the 12% increase in revenue in 2009. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to make further investments in R&D to remain competitive. Expenditures for R&D increased 42% or $327 million to $1.1 billion in 2008 compared to 2007. These increases were due primarily to an increase in headcount in 2008 and higher stock-based compensation expenses. In 2008, $11 million of software development costs were capitalized related to Mac OS X Snow Leopard and excluded from R&D expense, while R&D expense for 2007 excluded $75 million of capitalized software development costs related to Mac OS X Leopard and iPhone software. Although total R&D expense increased 42% during 2008, it remained relatively flat as a percentage of net sales given the 35% increase in revenue during 2008. Selling, General and Administrative Expense (“SG&A”) SG&A expenditures increased $388 million or 10% to $4.1 billion in 2009 compared to 2008. These increases are due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, higher stock-based compensation expenses and higher spending on marketing and advertising. Expenditures for SG&A increased $798 million or 27% to $3.8 billion in 2008 compared to 2007. These increases are due primarily to higher stock-based compensation expenses, higher variable selling expenses resulting from the significant year-over-year increase in total net sales and the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets. In addition, the Company incurred higher spending on marketing and advertising during 2008 compared to 2007. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for the three years ended September 26, 2009, are as follows (in millions): Total other income and expense decreased $294 million or 47% to $326 million during 2009 compared to $620 million and $599 million in 2008 and 2007, respectively. The overall decrease in other income and expense is attributable to the significant decline in interest rates during 2009 compared to 2008 and 2007, partially offset by the Company’s higher cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities was 1.43%, 3.44% and 5.27% during 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. During 2009, 2008 and 2007, the Company had no debt outstanding and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense. The Company’s investment portfolio had gross unrealized losses of $16 million and $121 million as of September 26, 2009 and September 27, 2008, respectively, which were offset by gross unrealized gains of $73 million and $4 million as of September 26, 2009 and September 27, 2008, respectively. The net unrealized gains as of September 26, 2009 and the net unrealized losses as of September 27, 2008 related primarily to long-term marketable securities. The Company considers the declines in market value of its marketable securities investment portfolio to be temporary in nature. The unrealized losses on the Company’s marketable securities were caused primarily by changes in market interest rates, specifically widening credit spreads. The Company does not have the intent to sell, nor is it more likely than not the Company will be required to sell, any investment before recovery of its amortized cost basis. Accordingly, no material declines in fair value were recognized in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations during 2009, 2008 and 2007. The Company may sell certain of its marketable securities prior to their stated maturities for strategic purposes, in anticipation of credit deterioration, or for duration management. The Company recognized no material net gains or losses during 2009, 2008 and 2007 related to such sales. Provision for Income Taxes The Company’s effective tax rates were 29%, 30% and 30% for 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The Company’s effective rates for these periods differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. As of September 26, 2009, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $3.2 billion before being offset against certain deferred liabilities of $1.8 billion for presentation on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for the years 2002 through 2003 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company has contested certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. All IRS audit issues for years prior to 2002 have been resolved. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In September 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Boards (“FASB”) amended the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) as summarized in Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2009-14, Software (Topic 985): Certain Revenue Arrangements That Include Software Elements, and ASU 2009-13, Revenue Recognition (Topic 605): Multiple-Deliverable Revenue Arrangements. As summarized in ASU 2009-14, ASC Topic 985 has been amended to remove from the scope of industry specific revenue accounting guidance for software and software related transactions, tangible products containing software components and non-software components that function together to deliver the product’s essential functionality. As summarized in ASU 2009-13, ASC Topic 605 has been amended (1) to provide updated guidance on whether multiple deliverables exist, how the deliverables in an arrangement should be separated, and the consideration allocated; (2) to require an entity to allocate revenue in an arrangement using estimated selling prices of deliverables if a vendor does not have vendor-specific objective evidence (“VSOE”) or third-party evidence of selling price; and (3) to eliminate the use of the residual method and require an entity to allocate revenue using the relative selling price method. The accounting changes summarized in ASU 2009-14 and ASU 2009-13 are both effective for fiscal years beginning on or after June 15, 2010, with early adoption permitted. Adoption may either be on a prospective basis or by retrospective application. The Company is currently assessing the impact of these amendments to the ASC on its accounting and reporting systems and processes; however, at this time the Company is unable to quantify the impact on its financial statements of its adoption or determine the timing and method of its adoption. As of September 26, 2009, total iPhone and Apple TV deferred revenue and deferred costs were $12.1 billion and $5.2 billion, respectively. The Company believes that application of these amendments will result in a substantial portion of the revenue associated with the sale of iPhone and Apple TV and all related cost of sales being recognized at the time of sale. Currently revenue and associated cost of sales for these products are deferred at the time of sale and recognized ratably on a straight-line basis over the currently estimated 24-month economic life of the products. During the first quarter of 2009, the Company adopted FASB ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (formerly referenced as Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) No. 157, Fair Value Measurements), which defines fair value, provides a framework for measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures required for fair value measurements. In February 2008, the FASB issued supplemental guidance that delays the effective date of this new fair value accounting standard to fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008 for all non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except for items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually) and will be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of 2010. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of this accounting standard, management does not currently believe adoption of this accounting pronouncement will have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition or operating results. In December 2007, the FASB issued FASB ASC 805, Business Combinations (formerly referenced as SFAS No. 141 (revised 2007), Business Combinations), which establishes principles and requirements for how an acquirer recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree in a business combination. This new accounting standard also establishes principles regarding how goodwill acquired in a business combination or a gain from a bargain purchase should be recognized and measured, as well as provides guidelines on the disclosure requirements on the nature and financial impact of the business combination. In April 2009, the FASB amended this new accounting standard to require that assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination that arise from contingencies be recognized at fair value, if the fair value can be determined during the measurement period. This new business combination accounting standard is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2008 and will be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of 2010 and will apply prospectively to any business combinations completed on or after that date. The effect of adoption of this new accounting pronouncement on the Company’s financial condition or operating results will depend on the nature of acquisitions completed after the date of adoption. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the three years ended September 26, 2009 (in millions): As of September 26, 2009, the Company had $34.0 billion in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, an increase of $9.5 billion from September 27, 2008. The principal component of this net increase was the cash generated by operating activities of $10.2 billion, which was partially offset by payments for acquisitions of property, plant and equipment of $1.1 billion. The Company’s cash generated by operating activities significantly exceeded its net income due primarily to the increase in deferred revenue, net of deferred costs, associated with subscription accounting for iPhone. The Company’s marketable securities investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly rated securities, generally with a minimum rating of single-A or equivalent. As of September 26, 2009 and September 27, 2008, $17.4 billion and $11.3 billion, respectively, of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital asset purchases, outstanding commitments and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Capital Assets The Company’s cash payments for capital asset purchases were $1.1 billion during 2009, consisting of $369 million for retail store facilities and $775 million for real estate acquisitions and corporate infrastructure including information systems enhancements. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $1.9 billion for capital asset purchases during 2010, including approximately $400 million for Retail facilities and approximately $1.5 billion for corporate facilities, infrastructure, and product tooling and manufacturing process equipment. Historically the Company has opened between 25 and 50 new retail stores per year. During 2010, the Company expects to open a number of new stores near the upper end of this range, over half of which are expected to be located outside of the U.S. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 26, 2009 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as current liabilities (in millions): Lease Commitments As of September 26, 2009, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of $1.9 billion, $1.5 billion of which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. The Company’s major facility leases are generally for terms of one to 20 years and generally provide renewal options for terms of one to five additional years. Leases for retail space are for terms of five to 20 years, the majority of which are for ten years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. In addition, the Company has an off-balance sheet warranty obligation for products accounted for under subscription accounting whereby the Company recognizes warranty expense as incurred. As of September 26, 2009, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments, component purchase commitments and estimated warranty commitments of $4.8 billion. The Company has entered into prepaid long-term supply agreements to secure the supply of certain inventory components. During the first quarter of 2009, a long-term supply agreement with Intel Corporation was terminated and the remaining prepaid balance of $167 million was repaid to the Company. During the second and fourth quarters of 2009, the Company made a prepayment of $500 million to LG Display for the purchase of LCD panels and a prepayment of $500 million to Toshiba to purchase NAND flash memory, respectively. As of September 26, 2009, the Company had a total of $1.2 billion of inventory component prepayments outstanding. Asset Retirement Obligations The Company’s asset retirement obligations are associated with commitments to return property subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. As of September 26, 2009, the Company estimated that gross expected future cash flows of $32 million would be required to fulfill these obligations. Other Obligations Other outstanding obligations were $356 million as of September 26, 2009, which related to advertising, research and development, Internet and telecommunications services and other obligations. As of September 26, 2009, the Company had gross unrecognized tax benefits of $971 million and an additional $291 million for gross interest and penalties classified as non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The Company believes it is reasonably possible that tax audit resolutions could reduce its unrecognized tax benefits by between $105 million and $145 million in the next 12 months. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnifications The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a liability related to unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would materially adversely affect its financial condition or operating results. Therefore, the Company did not record a liability for infringement costs as of either September 26, 2009 or September 27, 2008. The Company has entered into indemnification agreements with its directors and executive officers. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed to indemnify such individuals to the fullest extent permitted by law against liabilities that arise by reason of their status as directors or officers and to advance expenses incurred by such individuals in connection with related legal proceedings. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential amount of payments the Company could be required to make under these agreements due to the limited history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each claim. However, the Company maintains directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce its exposure to such obligations, and payments made under these agreements historically have not materially adversely affected the Company’s financial condition or operating results. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled “Risk Factors” above, which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets personal computers, portable digital music players, and mobile communication devices and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions. The Company’s products and services include the Mac line of desktop and portable computers, the iPod line of portable digital music players, iPhone, Apple TV, Xserve, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the Mac OS X operating system, third-party digital content through the iTunes Store, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company sells its products worldwide through its online stores, its retail stores, its direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, retailers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Mac, iPod and iPhone compatible products, including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and peripherals through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to consumer, small and mid-sized business (“SMB”), education, enterprise, government, and creative markets. The Company is focused on providing innovative products and solutions to consumer, SMB, education, enterprise, government and creative customers that greatly enhance their evolving digital lifestyles. The Company is the only participant in the personal computer and consumer electronics industries that controls the design and development of the entire personal computer, including the hardware, operating system, and sophisticated software applications, as well as the design and development of portable digital music players, mobile communication devices, and a variety of products and solutions for obtaining and enjoying digital content. The Company is therefore uniquely positioned to offer superior and well-integrated digital lifestyle products and solutions, which are further enhanced by the Company’s emphasis on ease-of-use and creative industrial designs. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including personal computers with its Mac line of personal computers, consumer electronics with its iPod product families, mobile communications with iPhone, and distribution of third-party digital content through its online iTunes Store. While the Company is widely recognized as a leading innovator in the personal computer and consumer electronics markets as well as a leader in the emerging market for distribution of digital content, these markets are highly competitive and subject to aggressive pricing. To remain competitive, the Company believes that increased investment in research and development and marketing and advertising is necessary to maintain or expand its position in the markets where it competes. The Company’s R&D spending is focused on further developing its existing Mac line of personal computers, its operating system, application software, iPhone and iPods; developing new digital lifestyle consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new product areas and technologies. The Company also believes increased investment in marketing and advertising programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness. The Company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration, demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available only on Mac computers, and demonstrate the compatibility of the Mac with the Windows platform and networks. The Company further believes providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting new and retaining existing customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company continues to expand and improve its distribution capabilities by opening its own retail stores in the U.S. and internationally. The Company had 247 stores open as of September 27, 2008. The Company has also invested in programs to enhance reseller sales, including the Apple Sales Consultant Program, which places Apple employees and contractors at selected third-party reseller locations. The Company believes providing direct contact with its targeted customers is an efficient way to demonstrate the advantages of its Mac computers and other products over those of its competitors. The Company also sells to customers directly through its online stores around the world and through its direct sales force. The Company’s iPods are sold through a significant number of distribution points to provide broad access. iPods can be purchased in certain department stores, member-only warehouse stores, large retail chains, and specialty retail stores, as well as through the channels for Mac distribution listed above. iPhone is distributed through the Company, its cellular network carriers’ distribution channels, and certain third-party resellers. The Company has signed multi-year agreements with various cellular network carriers authorizing them to distribute and provide cellular network services for iPhone 3G in over 70 countries. These agreements are generally not exclusive with a specific carrier, except in the U.S., U.K., France, Germany, Spain, Ireland, and certain other countries. The Company expects to ship iPhone 3G in over 70 countries by the end of calendar year 2008. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, music products, digital content, peripherals, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue for software products (operating system software and applications software), or any product that is considered to be software-related, in accordance with the guidance in Emerging Issues Task Force (“EITF”) No. 03-5, Applicability of AICPA Statement of Position 97-2 to Non-software Deliverables in an Arrangement Containing More-Than-Incidental Software, (e.g., Mac computers, iPod portable digital music players and iPhone) pursuant to American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (“AICPA”) Statement of Position (“SOP”) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as amended. For products that are not software or software-related, (e.g., digital content sold on the iTunes Store and certain Mac, iPod and iPhone supplies and accessories), the Company recognizes revenue pursuant to the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) No. 104, Revenue Recognition. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable, revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable and all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met. For both Apple TV and iPhone, the Company has indicated that from time-to-time it may provide future unspecified features and additional software products free of charge to customers. Therefore, sales of Apple TV and iPhone handsets are recognized under subscription accounting in accordance with SOP No. 97-2. The Company recognizes the associated revenue and cost of goods sold on a straight-line basis over the currently estimated 24-month economic lives of these products, with any loss recognized at the time of sale. Costs incurred by the Company for engineering, sales, marketing, and warranty are expensed as incurred. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s policy requires that, if refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have a negative impact on the Company’s results of operations. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company distributes its products through third-party distributors and resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and enterprise customers. The Company generally does not require collateral from its customers; however, the Company will require collateral in certain instances to limit credit risk. In addition, when possible the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in Latin America, Europe, Asia, and Australia and by arranging with third-party financing companies to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the Company’s direct customers. These credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company generally does not assume any recourse or credit-risk-sharing related to any of these arrangements. However, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral, third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company’s distribution and retail channel partners. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management’s assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of the credit worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. The Company records an allowance to reduce the specific receivables to the amount that it reasonably believes to be collectible. The Company also records an allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors, including historical experience with bad debts, the general economic environment, the financial condition of the Company’s distribution channels, and the aging of such receivables. If there is a deterioration of a major customer’s financial condition, if the Company becomes aware of additional information related to the credit-worthiness of a major customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Company may have to adjust its allowance for doubtful accounts, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The personal computer, consumer electronics and mobile communications industries are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs, which would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company accrues reserves for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company’s requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional reserves for cancellation fees that would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost for hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. For products accounted for under subscription accounting pursuant to SOP No. 97-2, the Company recognizes warranty expense as incurred. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could negatively affect the Company’s results of operations. The Company periodically provides updates to its applications and operating system software to maintain the software’s compliance with specifications. The estimated cost to develop such updates is accounted for as warranty cost that is recognized at the time related software revenue is recognized. Factors considered in determining appropriate accruals related to such updates include the number of units delivered, the number of updates expected to occur, and the historical cost and estimated future cost of the resources necessary to develop these updates. Stock-Based Compensation The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment. Under the provisions of SFAS No. 123R, stock-based compensation cost is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair-value as calculated by the Black-Scholes-Merton (“BSM”) option-pricing model and is recognized as expense ratably on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. The BSM option-pricing model requires various judgmental assumptions including expected volatility, forfeiture rates, and expected option life. Significant changes in any of these assumptions could materially affect the fair value of stock-based awards granted in the future. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. Effective at the beginning of 2008, the Company adopted Financial Interpretation No. (“FIN”) 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes-an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109. Further information may be found in Note 5, “Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of FIN 48 and other complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Legal Proceedings” and in Note 8 “Commitments and Contingencies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. In accordance with SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, the Company records a contingent liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In management’s opinion, the Company does not have a potential liability related to any current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its financial condition or operating results. However, the outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company are subject to significant uncertainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of these legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved against the Company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Net Sales Fiscal years 2008 and 2007 spanned 52 weeks while fiscal year 2006 spanned 53 weeks. An additional week is included in the first fiscal quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. The following table summarizes net sales and Mac unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product during the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2008 (in millions, except unit sales in thousands and per unit amounts): (a) Other Segments include Asia Pacific and FileMaker. (b) Includes iMac, Mac mini, Mac Pro, Power Mac, and Xserve product lines. (c) Includes MacBook, iBook, MacBook Air, MacBook Pro, and PowerBook product lines. (d) Consists of iTunes Store sales, iPod services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (e) Derived from handset sales, carrier agreements, and Apple-branded and third-party iPhone accessories. (f) Includes sales of Apple-branded and third-party displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories. (g) Includes sales of Apple-branded operating system and application software, third-party software, AppleCare, and Internet services. (h) Derived by dividing total Mac net sales by total Mac unit sales. (i) Derived by dividing total iPod net sales by total iPod unit sales. NM = Not Meaningful Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Net sales during 2008 increased 35% or $8.5 billion from 2007. Several factors contributed to these increases including the following: • Mac net sales increased $4.0 billion or 38% during 2008 compared to 2007, while Mac unit sales increased by 2.7 million units or 38%. Net sales related to the Company’s Mac shipments accounted for 44% of the Company’s total net revenue. Higher Mac unit sales, which contributed to the increases in net sales, were driven by higher sales of all of the Company’s portable products as well as the popularity of the iMac, which experienced strong growth in net sales and unit sales in all of the Company’s reportable segments. Unit sales of the Company’s portable products accounted for 62% of the Company’s personal computer shipments in both 2008 and 2007. Net sales and unit sales of the Company’s portable products both increased by 38% during 2008 compared to 2007. This growth was attributable to strong demand for all the portable products, particularly the MacBook, which had double-digit growth in all of the Company’s operating segments, and the addition of the MacBook Air, which was introduced to the Company’s portable product line in January 2008. Growth of the Company’s desktop systems was also strong, with increased net sales and unit sales of 39% and 37%, respectively, during 2008 due primarily to strong sales of the iMac in all of the Company’s operating segments. • Net sales of iPods increased $848 million or 10% during 2008 compared to 2007 whereas unit sales of iPods increased 6% compared to 2007. The iPod unit growth was due to strong demand for the iPod touch, and to a lesser extent, higher unit sales of the iPod shuffle due to a price reduction in February 2008. iPod net sales grew faster than iPod unit sales due to higher average selling prices caused by a shift in overall iPod product mix to the higher priced iPod touch. • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $1.8 billion for 2008, with iPhone handset unit sales totaling 11.6 million. During 2008, sales of iPhone expanded beyond the U.S. and the Company expects to be shipping iPhones in over 70 countries by the end of December 2008. Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $123 million in 2007, which represented sales for one fiscal quarter. iPhone net sales include the portion of handset revenue recognized in accordance with subscription accounting over the product’s 24-month estimated economic life, as well as revenue from sales of iPhone accessories and from carrier agreements. • Net sales of other music related products and services increased $844 million or 34% during the 2008 compared to 2007, due primarily to significantly increased net sales from the iTunes Store in each of the Company’s geographic segments. The Company believes this success is the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading third-party digital content, the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale and rent via the iTunes Store, and the launch of the iTunes App Store. The Company continues to expand its iTunes content offerings around the world. • Net sales of peripherals and other hardware increased $399 million or 32% compared to 2007 due to an increase in wireless networking products and other hardware accessories, including printers and scanners, which was partially offset by a decrease in net sales of displays. • Net sales of software, service, and other sales rose $699 million or 46% during 2008 compared to 2007. This growth was due in large part to increased sales of Apple-branded and third-party developers’ software products and increased net sales of AppleCare Protection Plan (“APP”) extended service and support contracts. Fiscal Year 2007 versus 2006 Net sales during 2007 increased 24% or $4.7 billion from 2006 even though fiscal year 2007 spanned 52 weeks while fiscal year 2006 spanned 53 weeks. Several factors contributed to these increases including the following: • Mac net sales increased $3 billion or 40% during 2007 compared to 2006, while Mac unit sales increased by 1.75 million units or 33%. The 33% Mac unit sales growth rate is significantly greater than the estimated growth rate of the overall personal computer industry during that timeframe. Unit sales of the Company’s portable products accounted for 62% of the Company’s personal computer shipments in 2007, up from 54% in 2006. Net sales and unit sales of the Company’s portable products increased 55% and 51%, respectively, during 2007 compared to 2006. This growth was due to strong demand for the MacBook, which increased in each of the Company’s operating segments, as well as the MacBook Pro, which increased in each operating segment except Japan. Mac desktop net sales and unit sales increased by 21% and 12%, respectively, during 2007 due to stronger sales of the iMac in each of the Company’s operating segments. The Mac desktop net sales growth was greater than the unit sales growth due primarily to a shift in desktop product mix away from the lower-price Mac Mini and discontinued eMac and toward the iMac. • Net sales of iPods increased $629 million or 8% during 2007 compared to 2006. Unit sales of iPods increased 31% compared to 2006. The iPod growth was driven primarily by increased sales of the iPod shuffle and iPod nano particularly in international markets. iPod unit sales growth was significantly greater than iPod net sales due to a shift in overall iPod product mix, as well as due to lower selling prices for the iPod classic, iPod nano and iPod shuffle in 2007 compared to 2006. • Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $123 million in 2007. iPhone net sales include the portion of iPhone handset revenue recognized in accordance with subscription accounting over the product’s 24-month estimated economic life, as well as sales of iPhone accessory products and revenue from carrier agreements. iPhone unit sales were 1.39 million in 2007. • Net sales of other music related products and services increased $611 million or 32% during 2007 compared to 2006 due to increased net sales from the iTunes Store. The Company believes this growth was the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading digital content and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale via the iTunes Store. • Net sales of peripherals and other hardware increased $160 million or 15% compared to 2006 due to an increase in wireless networking products and other hardware accessories, including printers and scanners, which was partially offset by a decrease in net sales of displays. • Net sales of software, service, and other sales rose $229 million or 18% during 2007 compared to 2006. This growth was attributable primarily to increased net sales of APP extended service and support contracts and increased sales of Apple branded and third-party developers’ software products. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The Americas, Europe, and Japan reportable segments do not include activities related to the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Retail segment operates Apple-owned retail stores in the U.S. and in international markets. Each reportable geographic operating segment and the Retail operating segment provide similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Note 9, “Segment Information and Geographic Data” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Americas During 2008, net sales in the Americas segment increased $3.0 billion or 26% compared to 2007. The primary drivers of this growth were the significant year-over-year increase in sales of the iPod touch, Mac portable systems, content from the iTunes Store, and iPhone. The Company began shipping iPhone in June 2007 and the growth in iPhone sales in 2008 resulted from a full year of iPhone shipments. The increase in Mac net sales of $1.3 billion or 30% and Mac unit sales of 961 million or 32% is attributable to growth in all of the Mac portable systems, particularly the MacBook, and higher sales of the iMac. Net sales of iPods increased due to a shift in product mix toward higher priced iPods, particularly the iPod touch, which was upgraded in June 2008. In 2008, the Americas segment represented 45% of the Company’s total net sales as compared to 48% in the same period of 2007. During 2008, U.S. education channel net sales and Mac unit sales increased by 14% and 19%, respectively, compared to 2007. Net sales from the higher education market grew 15% during 2008 compared to 2007, while net sales in the K-12 market grew 12% during the same period. During 2007, net sales in the Americas segment increased $2.2 billion, or 23%, compared to 2006. The main sources of this growth were Mac portable products, iMacs, iPods, and the sales of third-party content from the iTunes Store. Sales of Mac portable products increased due to the popularity of the MacBook, introduced in May 2006 and updated in May 2007, as well as the MacBook Pro, introduced in January 2006 and updated in June 2007. Sales of iMacs grew due to a shift in desktop product mix away from the Mac mini and discontinued eMac as well as the strong reception of the new iMac introduced in August 2007. Sales of iPods grew due to increased demand for the iPod nano and iPod shuffle and the introduction of the iPod touch in September 2007. During 2007, the Americas segment represented 48% of the Company’s total net sales as compared to 49% in the same period of 2006. During 2007, U.S. education channel net sales and Mac unit sales increased by 14% and 18%, respectively, compared to 2006. Net sales from the higher education market grew 17% during 2007 compared to 2006, while net sales in the K-12 market grew 10% during the same period. Europe For 2008, net sales and unit sales in Europe increased 40% and 39%, respectively, compared to the same period in 2007. The main drivers of this growth were strong sales of Mac portable systems and iMac, increased sales from the iTunes Store, and iPhone. Also contributing to the increase in net sales were higher iPod net sales due primarily to the iPod touch, which was upgraded in June 2008. Sales of Mac portable products increased due to the MacBook Pro and the MacBook, both updated in February 2008, as well as the MacBook Air, introduced in January 2008. Mac desktop sales also increased due primarily to the popularity of the iMac, which was updated in April 2008. Sales from the iTunes Store grew substantially by 79% from 2007 as a result of heightened consumer interest in downloading digital content and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale via the iTunes Store. The Europe segment represented 23% of total net sales in 2008, consistent with 2007. Europe segment net sales increased $1.4 billion or 33% during 2007 compared to 2006. Consistent with the Americas segment, the primary drivers of this growth were Mac portable products, iMacs, iPods, and the sales of third-party content from the iTunes Store. Sales of Mac portable products increased due to the popularity of both the MacBook and MacBook Pro. Sales of iMacs grew due to a shift in desktop product mix away from the Mac mini and discontinued eMac as well as the strong reception of the new iMac introduced in August 2007. Sales of iPods grew due primarily to increased demand for the iPod nano and iPod shuffle. The Company believes that the growth in iTunes Store sales was the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading digital content and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale via the iTunes Store. Japan Japan net sales increased $427 million or 39% in 2008 compared to 2007. The primary contributors to the growth in net sales were increases in sales of iPods, iMac, Mac portable systems, and strong sales from the iTunes Store. Net sales, unit sales and the average selling price of iPods increased during 2008 compared to 2007, driven by strong demand for iPod touch and iPod nano. Additionally, Mac net sales and unit sales grew 42% and 29%, respectively, in 2008 compared to 2007 due to increase in sales of the iMac and Mac portable systems, particularly MacBook, as well as the introduction of MacBook Air in January 2008. Japan’s net sales declined by $129 million or 11% in 2007 compared to 2006. Total Mac unit sales in Japan declined 1% during 2007. The decrease in the Japan segment’s overall net sales was attributable primarily to decreases in iPod and Mac desktop sales, partially offset by an increase in revenue from MacBooks and sales of third-party content from the iTunes Store. The decline in net sales and Mac unit sales is partially attributable to Japan’s declining consumer PC market, and the iPod sales decline is due primarily to lower average selling prices. The Company is continuing to evaluate ways to improve the future results of its Japan segment. Retail Retail net sales grew by 53% during 2008 compared to 2007, due in large part to increased sales of Mac portable and desktop products, strong demand for the iPhone and iPod touch, and new store openings. The Company opened 50 new retail stores during 2008, including a total of 19 international stores, bringing the total number of open stores to 247 as of September 27, 2008. This compares to 197 open stores as of September 29, 2007 and 165 open stores as of September 30, 2006. With an average of 211 stores and 178 stores opened during 2008 and 2007, respectively, average revenue per store increased to $29.9 million for 2008, compared to $23.1 million in 2007. Retail Mac net sales and Mac unit sales grew by 42% and 47%, respectively, during 2008 compared to the 2007, due primarily to strong demand for MacBook, iMac, and MacBook Air, introduced in January 2008. Net sales of iPods increased due to the popularity of the iPod touch, which was upgraded in June 2008, and a higher average selling price compared to 2007. The higher iPod average selling price was due to strong demand for the iPod touch. The Retail segment’s net sales increased by 27% to $4.1 billion during 2007 compared to 2006. Retail segment Mac unit sales increased 56% during 2007 as compared to 2006. With an average of 178 stores open during 2007, average revenue per store was $23.1 million, compared to $22.9 million in 2006. The increase in Retail segment net sales during 2007 compared to 2006 was due primarily to stronger sales of Mac portable products, iMacs, accessories and services. The increase was partially offset primarily by lower net sales of iPods and other music related products due to the expanded availability of those products through third-party resellers. As measured by the Company’s operating segment reporting, the Retail segment reported operating income of $1.3 billion during 2008 as compared to operating income of $875 million and $600 million during 2007 and 2006, respectively. This improvement in 2008 was attributable primarily to the significant Retail net sales growth of 53% as compared to 2007. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital asset purchases associated with the Retail segment were $389 million in 2008, bringing the total capital asset purchases since inception of the Retail segment to $1.4 billion. As of September 27, 2008, the Retail segment had approximately 15,900 full-time equivalent employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with retail store space and related facilities of $1.4 billion. The Company would incur substantial costs if it were to close multiple retail stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and operating results. Other Segments The Company’s Other Segments, which consist of its Asia Pacific and FileMaker operations, experienced an increase in net sales of $707 million, or 40% during 2008 as compared to 2007. These increases are related primarily to strong growth in sales of all Mac portable systems, iPods, the iMac, and content from the iTunes Store in the Company’s Asia Pacific region. Sales from the iTunes Store in the Company’s Asia Pacific region grew significantly by 109% over 2007. Mac net sales and unit sales grew by 52% and 50%, respectively, due to increased sales of the iMac and all Mac portables. The Company’s Other Segments experienced an increase in net sales of $406 million, or 30% during 2007 compared to 2006. This increase related primarily to a 58% increase in sales of Mac portable products and strong iPod sales in the Company’s Asia Pacific region. Gross Margin Gross margin for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2008, are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): Gross margin percentage was relatively flat in 2008 as compared to 2007. Gross margin percentage of 34.0% in 2007 increased significantly from 29.0% in 2006. The primary drivers of this increase were more favorable costs on certain commodity components, including NAND flash memory and DRAM memory, higher overall revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production costs and a higher percentage of revenue from the Company’s direct sales channels. The Company expects its gross margin percentage to decrease in future periods compared to levels achieved during 2008 and 2007, and anticipates gross margin levels of about 30% in 2009. This expected decline is due largely to the anticipated impact of product transitions, flat or reduced pricing on new and innovative products that have higher cost structures, both expected and potential future cost increases for key components, a stronger U.S. dollar, and higher logistical costs. The foregoing statements regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage are forward-looking and could differ from anticipated levels because of several factors, including but not limited to certain of those set forth below in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” under the subheading “Future operating results depend upon the Company’s ability to obtain key components including, but not limited to microprocessors, NAND flash memory, DRAM and LCDs at favorable prices and in sufficient quantities,” which is incorporated herein by reference. There can be no assurance that targeted gross margin percentage levels will be achieved. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global product pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, product transitions and expected increases in the cost of key components including, but not limited to microprocessors, NAND flash memory, dynamic random access memory (“DRAM”) and liquid crystal displays (“LCDs”), as well as potential increases in the costs of outside manufacturing services and a potential shift in the Company’s sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to these competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take product pricing actions, which would adversely affect gross margins. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to manage product quality and warranty costs effectively and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2008, are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development (“R&D”) Expenditures for R&D increased 42% or $327 million to $1.1 billion in 2008 compared to 2007. These increases were due primarily to an increase in R&D headcount in the current year to support expanded R&D activities and higher stock-based compensation expenses. In 2008, $11 million of software development costs were capitalized related to Mac OS X Version 10.6 Snow Leopard and excluded from R&D expense, while R&D expense for 2007 excluded $75 million of capitalized software development costs related to Mac OS X Leopard and iPhone. Although total R&D expense increased 42% during 2008, it remained relatively flat as a percentage of net sales given the 35% increase in revenue during 2008. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to increase spending in R&D to remain competitive. Expenditures for R&D increased 10% or $70 million to $782 million in 2007 compared to 2006. The increases in R&D expense were due primarily to an increase in R&D headcount in 2007 to support expanded R&D activities, partially offset by one less week of expenses in the first quarter of 2007 and the capitalized software development costs mentioned above. Selling, General, and Administrative Expense (“SG&A”) Expenditures for SG&A increased $798 million or 27% to $3.8 billion in 2008 compared to 2007. These increases are due primarily to higher stock-based compensation expenses, higher variable selling expenses resulting from the significant year-over-year increase in total net sales and the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets. In addition, the Company incurred higher spending on marketing and advertising during 2008 compared to 2007. Expenditures for SG&A increased $530 million or 22% during 2007 compared to 2006. The increase was due primarily to higher direct and indirect channel variable selling expenses resulting from the significant year-over-year increase in total net sales in 2007, the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, and higher spending on marketing and advertising, partially offset by one less week of expenses in the first quarter of 2007. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2008, are as follows (in millions): Total other income and expense increased $21 million to $620 million during 2008 as compared to $599 million and $365 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. While the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment balances increased by 59% in 2008, other income and expense increased only 4% due to the decline in the weighted average interest rate earned of 3.44%. The overall increase in other income and expense is attributable to the Company’s higher cash and short-term investment balances, which more than offset the decline in interest rates during 2008 as compared to 2007. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments was 5.27% and 4.58% during 2007 and 2006, respectively. During 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company had no debt outstanding and accordingly did not incur any related interest expense. Provision for Income Taxes The Company’s effective tax rates were 30% for the years ended September 27, 2008 and September 29, 2007, and 29% for the year ended September 30, 2006. The Company’s effective rates differ from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. As of September 27, 2008, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $2.1 billion before being offset against certain deferred liabilities for presentation on the Company’s balance sheet. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. The Company released a valuation allowance of $5 million since it has been determined that it is more likely than not the associated deferred tax assets will be realized. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for the years 2002 through 2003 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company has contested certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. All IRS audit issues for years prior to 2002 have been resolved. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits are resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution occurs. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In September 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements, which defines fair value, provides a framework for measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures required for fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 applies to other accounting pronouncements that require fair value measurements; it does not require any new fair value measurements. In February 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position (“FSP”) No. FAS 157-1, Application of FASB Statement No. 157 to FASB Statement No. 13 and Other Accounting Pronouncements That Address Fair Value Measurements for Purposes of Lease Classification or Measurement under Statement 13 and FSP No. FAS 157-2, Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 157. FSP 157-1 amends SFAS No. 157 to remove certain leasing transactions from its scope. FSP 157-2 delays the effective date of SFAS No. 157 to fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008 for all non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except for items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually) and will be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. In October 2008, the FASB issued FSP No. 157-3, Determining the Fair Value of a Financial Asset When the Market for That Asset is Not Active, to clarify the application of SFAS 157 in inactive markets for financial assets. FSP 157-3 became effective upon issuance and SFAS No. 157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and will be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 157, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition or operating results. In February 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities-including an amendment of FASB Statement No. 115. SFAS No. 159 allows companies to choose to measure eligible financial instruments and certain other items at fair value that are not required to be measured at fair value. SFAS No. 159 requires that unrealized gains and losses on items for which the fair value option has been elected be reported in earnings at each reporting date. SFAS No. 159 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and will be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 159, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition or operating results. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141 (revised 2007), Business Combinations, which establishes principles and requirements for how an acquirer recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree in a business combination. SFAS No. 141R also establishes principles around how goodwill acquired in a business combination or a gain from a bargain purchase should be recognized and measured, as well as provides guidelines on the disclosure requirements on the nature and financial impact of the business combination. SFAS No. 141R is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2008 and will be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 141R, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition or operating results. In March 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 161, Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities-an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133, which requires companies to provide additional disclosures about its objectives and strategies for using derivative instruments, how the derivative instruments and related hedged items are accounted for under SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, and related interpretations, and how the derivative instruments and related hedged items affect the Company’s financial statements. SFAS No. 161 also requires companies to disclose information about credit risk-related contingent features in their hedged positions. SFAS No. 161 is effective for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after November 15, 2008 and is required to be adopted by the Company beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2009. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 161, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition or operating results. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2008 (in millions): As of September 27, 2008, the Company had $24.5 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, an increase of $9.1 billion from September 29, 2007. The principal components of this net increase were cash generated by operating activities of $9.6 billion, proceeds from the issuance of common stock under stock plans of $483 million and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation of $757 million. These increases were partially offset by payments for acquisitions of property, plant, and equipment of $1.1 billion, payments made in connection with business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $220 million and payments for acquisitions of intangible assets of $108 million. The Company’s cash generated by operating activities significantly exceeded its net income due primarily to the large increase in deferred revenue, net of deferred costs, associated with subscription accounting for iPhone. The Company’s short-term investment portfolio is invested primarily in highly rated securities with a minimum rating of single-A. As of September 27, 2008 and September 29, 2007, $11.3 billion and $6.5 billion, respectively, of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. The Company had $117 million in net unrealized losses on its investment portfolio, primarily related to investments with stated maturities ranging from one to five years, as of September 27, 2008, and net unrealized losses of approximately $11 million on its investment portfolio, primarily related to investments with stated maturities from one to five years, as of September 29, 2007. The Company has the intent and ability to hold such investments for a sufficient period of time to allow for recovery of the principal amounts invested. Accordingly, none of these declines in fair value were recognized in the Company’s Statement of Operations. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Capital Assets The Company’s cash payments for capital asset purchases were $1.1 billion during 2008, consisting of $389 million for retail store facilities and $702 million for real estate acquisitions and corporate infrastructure including information systems enhancements. The Company anticipates utilizing approximately $1.5 billion for capital asset purchases during 2009, including approximately $400 million for Retail facilities and approximately $1.1 billion for corporate facilities and infrastructure. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 27, 2008 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Company’s balance sheet as current liabilities (in millions): Lease Commitments As of September 27, 2008, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of $1.8 billion, $1.4 billion of which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. The Company’s major facility leases are generally for terms of 3 to 20 years and generally provide renewal options for terms of 1 to 5 additional years. Leases for retail space are for terms of 5 to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years, and often contain multi-year renewal options. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. In addition, the Company has an off-balance sheet warranty obligation for products accounted for under subscription accounting pursuant to SOP No. 97-2 whereby the Company recognizes warranty expense as incurred. As of September 27, 2008, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments, component purchase commitments, and estimated warranty commitments of $5.4 billion. During 2006, the Company entered into long-term supply agreements with Hynix Semiconductor, Inc., Intel Corporation, Micron Technology, Inc., Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., and Toshiba Corporation to secure supply of NAND flash memory through calendar year 2010. As part of these agreements, the Company prepaid $1.25 billion for flash memory components during 2006, which will be applied to certain inventory purchases made over the life of each respective agreement. The Company utilized $567 million of the prepayment as of September 27, 2008. Asset Retirement Obligations The Company’s asset retirement obligations are associated with commitments to return property subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. As of September 27, 2008, the Company estimated that gross expected future cash flows of $28 million would be required to fulfill these obligations. Other Obligations Other outstanding obligations were $471 million as of September 27, 2008, which related to advertising, research and development, Internet and telecommunications services, and other obligations. During the first quarter of 2008, the Company adopted the provisions of FIN 48. The Company had historically classified interest and penalties and unrecognized tax benefits as current liabilities, but beginning with the adoption of FIN 48 the Company has reclassified gross interest and penalties and unrecognized tax benefits that are not expected to result in payment or receipt of cash within one year as non-current liabilities within the Consolidated Balance Sheet. As of September 27, 2008, the Company recorded gross unrecognized tax benefits of $506 million and gross interest and penalties of $219 million, both of which are classified as non-current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes; therefore, such amounts are not included in the above contractual obligation table. Indemnifications The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against it or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a liability related to unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would have a material adverse effect on its financial condition or operating results. Therefore, the Company did not record a liability for infringement costs as of either September 27, 2008 or September 29, 2007. Item 7A. Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as "anticipates," "expects," "believes," "plans," "predicts," and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company's actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled "Risk Factors" above. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to the Company's fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets personal computers, portable digital music players, and mobile communication devices and sells a variety of related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions. The Company's products and services include the Mac® line of desktop and portable computers, the iPod line of portable digital music players, iPhone, Apple TV, Xserve®, and Xserve RAID, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the Mac OS® X operating system, third-party digital content through the iTunes Store™, and a variety of accessory, service and support offerings. The Company sells its products worldwide through its online stores, its retail stores, its direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, resellers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Mac, iPod and iPhone compatible products, including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and peripherals through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to education, consumer, creative professional, business, and government customers. Further discussion of the Company's products may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Business." The Company believes that for both professionals and consumers the personal computer has become the center of an evolving digital lifestyle by integrating with and enhancing the utility of advanced digital devices such as the Company's iPods, iPhones, digital video and still cameras, televisions, personal digital assistants, and other digital devices. The attributes of the personal computer that enable this functionality include a high-quality user interface, easy access to relatively inexpensive data storage, the ability to run complex applications, and the ability to connect easily to a wide variety of other digital devices and to the Internet. The Company is the only participant in the personal computer industry that controls the design and development of the entire personal computer-from the hardware and operating system to sophisticated applications. This, along with its products' creative industrial designs, intuitive ease-of-use, and built-in graphics, multimedia and networking capabilities, uniquely positions the Company to offer innovative integrated digital lifestyle solutions. The Company's business strategy leverages its ability, through the design and development of its own operating system, hardware, and many software applications and technologies, to bring to its customers around the world compelling new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative industrial design. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including personal computers with its Mac line of computers, consumer electronics with its iPod product family of portable digital music players, and distribution of third-party digital content through its online iTunes Store. With the introduction of iPhone, the Company has also begun to compete with mobile communication device companies that have substantial experience and technological and financial resources. While the Company is widely recognized as a leading innovator in the personal computer and consumer electronics markets as well as a leader in the emerging market for distribution of digital content, these markets are highly competitive and subject to aggressive pricing. To remain competitive, the Company believes that increased investment in research and development ("R&D") and marketing and advertising is necessary to maintain or expand its position in the markets where it competes. The Company's R&D spending is focused on further developing its existing line of personal computers, operating systems, application software, and portable digital music players; developing new digital lifestyle consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new product areas such as iPhone and wireless technologies. The Company also believes increased investment in marketing and advertising programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness. The Company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration, demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available only on Mac computers, and demonstrate the compatibility of the Mac with the Windows platform and networks. The Company further believes providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting and retaining customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company has expanded and improved its distribution capabilities by opening its own retail stores in the U.S. and internationally. The Company had 197 stores open as of September 29, 2007. The Company also staffs selected third-party stores with the Company's own employees to improve the buying experience through reseller channels. The Company has deployed Apple employees and contractors in reseller locations around the world including the U.S., Canada, Europe, Japan, Asia, Latin America and Australia. The Company also sells to customers directly through its online stores around the world. To improve access to the iPod product family, the Company has significantly expanded the number of distribution points where iPods are sold. iPods can be purchased in certain department stores, member-only warehouse stores, large retail chains, and specialty retail stores, as well as through the channels for Mac distribution listed above. The Company began shipping iPhone in the U.S. on June 29, 2007, in the U.K. and Germany on November 9, 2007 and expects to begin shipping the iPhone in France on November 29, 2007. AT&T Mobility LLC ("AT&T"), O2 Limited ("O2"), T-Mobile International AG & Co. KG ("T-Mobile"), and France Telecom ("Orange") are the exclusive cellular network carriers for iPhone in the U.S., U.K., Germany, and France, respectively. iPhone is distributed through the Company and its exclusive cellular network carriers' distribution channels. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and the Company's discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company's management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company's consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company's critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, stock-based compensation, income taxes, and legal and other contingencies. Management considers these critical policies because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company's financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company's Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, music products, digital content, peripherals, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue for software products (operating system software and applications software), or any product that is considered to be software-related in accordance with the guidance in Emerging Issues Task Force ("EITF") No. 03-5, Applicability of AICPA Statement of Position 97-2 to Non-software Deliverables in an Arrangement Containing More-Than-Incidental Software, (e.g., Mac computers, iPod portable digital music players and iPhone) pursuant to American Institute of Certified Public Accountants ("AICPA") Statement of Position ("SOP") No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as amended. For products that are not software or software-related, (e.g., digital content sold on the iTunes Store and certain Mac, iPod and iPhone supplies and accessories) the Company recognizes revenue pursuant to SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin ("SAB") No. 104, Revenue Recognition. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped, and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company's product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable, revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable and all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met. During 2007, the Company began shipping Apple TV and iPhone. For both Apple TV and iPhone, the Company indicated it may provide future unspecified features and additional software products free of charge to customers. Therefore, sales of Apple TV and iPhone handsets are recognized under subscription accounting in accordance with SOP No. 97-2. The Company recognizes the associated revenue and cost of goods sold on a straight-line basis over the currently estimated 24-month economic lives of these products with any loss recognized at the time of sale. Costs incurred by the Company for engineering, sales, marketing and warranty are expensed as incurred. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. If refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company's historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which would have a negative impact on the Company's results of operations. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company distributes its products through third-party distributors and resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and commercial customers. The Company generally does not require collateral from its customers; however, the Company will require collateral in certain instances to limit credit risk. In addition, when possible the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in Latin America, Europe, Asia, and Australia by arranging with third-party financing companies to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the Company's direct customers. These credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company generally does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements. However, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral, third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company's distribution and retail channel partners. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management's assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of the credit worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. The Company records an allowance to reduce the specific receivables to the amount that is reasonably believed to be collectible. The Company also records an allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors including historical experience with bad debt, the general economic environment, the financial condition of the Company's distribution channels, and the aging of such receivables. If there is a deterioration of a major customer's financial condition, if the Company becomes aware of additional information related to the credit worthiness of a major customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Company may have to adjust its allowance for doubtful accounts, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments were made. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The personal computer, consumer electronics and mobile communications industries are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company's products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs which would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company accrues reserves for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company's requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company's products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company's products, the Company may be required to record additional reserves for cancellation fees that would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the cancellation fees are identified and recorded. Warranty Costs The Company provides for the estimated cost for hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company's typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. For products accounted for under subscription accounting pursuant to SOP No. 97-2, the Company recognizes warranty expense as incurred. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could negatively affect the Company's results of operations. The Company periodically provides updates to its applications and system software to maintain the software's compliance with specifications. The estimated cost to develop such updates is accounted for as warranty cost that is recognized at the time related software revenue is recognized. Factors considered in determining appropriate accruals related to such updates include the number of units delivered, the number of updates expected to occur, and the historical cost and estimated future cost of the resources necessary to develop these updates. Stock-Based Compensation The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ("SFAS") No. 123 (revised 2004) ("SFAS No. 123R"), Share-Based Payment. Under the provisions of SFAS No. 123R, stock-based compensation cost is estimated at the grant date based on the award's fair-value as calculated by the Black-Scholes-Merton ("BSM") option-pricing model and is recognized as expense ratably on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. The BSM model requires various judgmental assumptions including expected volatility, forfeiture rates, and expected option life. If any of the assumptions used in the BSM model change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially in the future from that recorded in the current period. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management's expectations could have a material impact on the Company's financial condition and operating results. Legal and Other Contingencies As discussed in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Legal Proceedings" and in Note 8 "Commitments and Contingencies" in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business. The Company records a contingent liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable in accordance with SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies. There is significant judgment required in both the probability determination and as to whether an exposure can be reasonably estimated. In management's opinion, the Company does not have a potential liability related to any current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its financial condition or operating results. However, the outcomes of legal proceedings and claims brought against the Company are subject to significant uncertainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of these legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved against the Company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. Net Sales Fiscal years 2007 and 2005 spanned 52 weeks while fiscal year 2006 spanned 53 weeks. This additional week is added to the first fiscal quarter approximately every six years to realign fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. Net sales and Mac unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product follow (net sales in millions and unit sales in thousands): Notes: (a)During 2007, the Company revised the way it measures the Retail Segment's operating results to a manner that is generally consistent with the Company's other operating segments. Prior period results have been reclassified to reflect this change to the Retail Segment's operating results along with the corresponding offsets to the other operating segments. Further information regarding the Company's operating segments may be found in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 9, "Segment Information and Geographic Data." (b)Other Segments include Asia Pacific and FileMaker. (c)Includes iMac, eMac, Mac mini, Mac Pro, Power Mac, and Xserve product lines. (d)Includes MacBook, iBook, MacBook Pro, and PowerBook product lines. (e)Consists of iTunes Store sales, iPod services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (f)Derived from handset sales, carrier agreements, and Apple-branded and third-party iPhone accessories. (g)Includes sales of Apple-branded and third-party displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories. (h)Includes sales of Apple-branded operating system, application software, third-party software, AppleCare, and Internet services. (i)Derived by dividing total Mac net sales by total Mac unit sales. (j)Derived by dividing total iPod net sales by total iPod unit sales. NM = Not Meaningful Fiscal Year 2007 versus 2006 Net sales during 2007 increased 24% or $4.7 billion from 2006 even though the fiscal year of 2007 spanned 52 weeks while the fiscal year of 2006 spanned 53 weeks. Several factors contributed to these increases including the following: •Mac net sales increased $3 billion or 40% during 2007 compared to 2006, while Mac unit sales increased by 1.75 million units or 33%. The 33% Mac unit sales growth rate is significantly greater than the estimated growth rate of the overall personal computer industry during that timeframe. Unit sales of the Company's portable products accounted for 62% of the Company's personal computer shipments in 2007, up from 54% in 2006. Net sales and unit sales of the Company's portable products increased 55% and 51%, respectively, during 2007 compared to 2006. This growth was due to strong demand for the MacBook, which increased in each of the Company's operating segments, as well as the MacBook Pro, which increased in each operating segment except Japan. Mac desktop net sales and unit sales increased by 21% and 12%, respectively, during 2007 due to stronger sales of the iMac in each of the Company's operating segments. The Mac desktop net sales growth was greater than the unit sales growth primarily due to a shift in desktop product mix away from the lower-price Mac Mini and discontinued eMac and toward the iMac. •Net sales of iPods increased $629 million or 8% during 2007 compared to 2006. Unit sales of iPods increased 31% compared to 2006. The iPod growth was primarily driven by increased sales of the iPod shuffle and iPod nano particularly in international markets. iPod unit sales growth was significantly greater than iPod net sales due to a shift in overall iPod product mix, as well as due to lower selling prices for the iPod classic, iPod nano and iPod shuffle in 2007 compared to 2006. •Net sales of iPhone and related products and services were $123 million in 2007. iPhone net sales include the portion of iPhone handset revenue recognized in accordance with subscription accounting over the product's 24-month estimated economic life, as well as sales of iPhone accessory products and revenue from carrier agreements. iPhone unit sales were 1.39 million in 2007. •Net sales of other music related products and services increased $611 million or 32% during 2007 compared to 2006 due to increased net sales from the iTunes Store. The Company believes this growth was the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading digital content and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale via the iTunes Store. •Net sales of peripherals and other hardware increased $160 million or 15% compared to 2006 due to an increase in wireless networking products and other hardware accessories, including printers and scanners, which was partially offset by a decrease in net sales of displays. •Net sales of software, service, and other sales rose $229 million or 18% during 2007 compared to 2006. This growth was primarily attributable to increased net sales of AppleCare Protection Plan ("APP") extended service and support contracts and increased sales of Apple branded and third-party developers' software products. Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Net sales during 2006 increased 39% or $5.4 billion from 2005. This increase was due in part to the fact that 2006 spanned 53 weeks while 2005 spanned 52 weeks. Several other factors contributed to these increases including the following: •Net sales of iPods increased $3.1 billion or 69% during 2006 compared to 2005. Unit sales of iPods totaled 39.4 million in 2006, which represents an increase of 75% from the 22.5 million iPod units sold in 2005. Strong iPod sales during 2006 reflected significant sales of both the hard-drive based iPod that supports video, first introduced in October of 2005 and the iPod nano, introduced in September 2005, as well as continued expansion of iPod distribution points. During 2006, the net sales per iPod unit sold decreased by 3% compared to 2005 primarily due to an overall decrease in average selling prices for all iPods as well as a shift in product mix to the iPod nano. •Mac net sales increased $1.1 billion or 18% during 2006 compared to 2005. Mac unit sales increased by 769,000 units or 17% during 2006 compared to 2005. These increases were mainly due to strong demand for the Intel-based MacBook and MacBook Pro systems and reflect a shift in product mix to portable products in all of the Company's operating segments. Net sales and unit sales of the Company's portable products increased 43% and 42%, respectively, during 2006 compared to 2005. Mac desktop net sales and unit sales both decreased by 3% during 2006 compared to 2005. The decrease in sales of the Company's Mac desktops was due to declines in sales of the Company's professional-oriented desktop products. The Company believes the decline in the Company's professional-oriented desktop products was due to customers delaying purchases of such products in anticipation of the release of the Intel-based Mac Pro, which did not begin shipping until August 2006, and updated software applications capable of running on Intel-based Mac computers, and the trend toward portable computers. A slight increase of 1% during 2006 in net sales per Mac unit sold was due to a shift in mix to higher-priced portable products, partially offset by price reductions on certain Mac systems. •Other music related products and services consists of sales associated with the iTunes Store and iPod services and accessories. Net sales of other music related products and services increased $986 million or 110% during 2006 compared to 2005. The increase was primarily due to increased net sales from the iTunes Store and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories and services. The increase in sales from the iTunes Store stemmed from significant growth in U.S. sales and the opening of the iTunes Store in Japan during August 2005 and Australia during October 2005. The increased sales from the iTunes Store were also attributable to the availability of videos, television shows, and feature-length movie downloads. •Net sales of software, service, and other sales increased $188 million or 17% during 2006 compared to 2005. The growth was primarily attributable to increased net sales of AppleCare Protection Plan ("APP") extended service and support contracts and application software, partially offset by a decrease in sales of Mac OS X. Mac OS X sales were particularly high in 2005 due to the release of Mac OS X Tiger in April 2005. Offsetting the favorable factors discussed above, the Company's net sales during 2006 were negatively impacted by the following: •Net sales of peripherals and other hardware declined $26 million or 2% compared to 2005 primarily due to price decreases and a decrease in net sales of displays relating to a shift in mix from desktop to portable systems. The decrease in net sales of displays for 2006 is consistent with the overall decrease in unit sales of Mac professional desktop systems. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company's reportable operating segments consist of the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The Americas, Europe, and Japan reportable segments do not include activities related to the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Retail segment operates Apple-owned retail stores in the U.S., Canada, Japan, the U.K. and Italy. Each reportable geographic operating segment and the Retail operating segment provide similar hardware and software products and similar services. During 2007, the Company revised the way it measures the Retail Segment's operating results to a manner that is generally consistent with the Company's other operating segments. Prior period results have been reclassified to reflect this change to the Retail Segment's operating results along with the corresponding offsets to the other operating segments. Further information regarding the Company's operating segments may be found in Note 9, "Segment Information and Geographic Data" in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Americas During 2007, net sales in the Americas segment increased $2.2 billion, or 23%, compared to 2006. The main sources of this growth were Mac portable products, iMacs, iPods, and the sales of third-party content from the iTunes Store. Sales of Mac portable products increased due to the popularity of the MacBook, introduced in May 2006 and updated in May 2007, as well as the MacBook Pro, introduced in January 2006 and updated in June 2007. Sales of iMacs grew due to a shift in desktop product mix away from the Mac mini and discontinued eMac as well as the strong reception of the new iMac introduced in August 2007. Sales of iPods grew due to increased demand for the iPod nano and iPod shuffle and the introduction of the iPod touch in September 2007. The Company believes that the growth in iTunes Store sales was the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading digital content and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale via the iTunes Store. During 2007, the Americas segment represented 48% of the Company's total net sales as compared to 49% in the same period of 2006. During 2007, U.S. education channel net sales and Mac unit sales increased by 14% and 18%, respectively, compared to 2006. Net sales from the higher education market grew 17% during 2007 compared to 2006, while net sales in the K-12 market grew 10% during the same period. During 2006, net sales in the Americas segment increased $2.8 billion, or 41%, compared to 2005. The primary contributors to this increase were iPods, other music related products and services, Mac portable systems, and APP. Sales of iPods increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated iPod with video-playing capabilities in October 2005 (now referred to as iPod classic) and the iPod nano during September 2005. The increase in other music related products and services was due to increases in sales of Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories and sales from the iTunes Store. The increase in sales of Mac portable systems in the Americas was due to strong sales of the MacBook and MacBook Pro during 2006. The overall increase in net sales was partially offset by a decline in net sales of desktops, displays, and Mac OS X. The decrease in desktop products and displays net sales reflects the overall shift in product mix toward portable Mac systems. Mac OS X sales decreased from 2005 since the Company had not released a new version of Mac OS X since Tiger began shipping in April 2005. During 2006, the Americas segment represented 49% of the Company's total net sales as compared to 48% in the same period of 2005. Europe Europe segment net sales increased $1.4 billion or 33% during 2007 compared to 2006. Consistent with the Americas segment, the primary drivers of this growth were Mac portable products, iMacs, iPods, and the sales of third-party content from the iTunes Store. Sales of Mac portable products increased due to the popularity of both the MacBook and MacBook Pro. Sales of iMacs grew due to a shift in desktop product mix away from the Mac mini and discontinued eMac as well as the strong reception of the new iMac introduced in August 2007. Sales of iPods grew primarily due to increased demand for the iPod nano and iPod shuffle. The Company believes that the growth in iTunes Store sales was the result of heightened consumer interest in downloading digital content and the expansion of third-party audio and video content available for sale via the iTunes Store. Europe segment net sales increased $1.0 billion or 33% during 2006 compared to 2005. Consistent with the Americas segment, these increases were a result of strong growth in iPod sales, other music related products and services, and Mac portable systems. Sales of iPods increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated iPod with video-playing capabilities in October 2005 and the iPod nano during September 2005. The increase in other music related products and services was due to increases in sales of Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories and sales from the iTunes Store. The increase in sales of portable systems in Europe was due to strong sales of the MacBook and MacBook Pro that were introduced during 2006. In addition, Europe also reported increased sales in APP related to the increase in Mac unit sales. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in desktop and Mac OS X net sales during 2006 compared to 2005. The decrease in desktop net sales was due to the shift in product mix toward portable Mac systems. Mac OS X sales have decreased from 2005 since the Company has not released a new version of Mac OS X since Tiger began shipping in April 2005. Japan Japan's net sales declined by $129 million or 11% in 2007 compared to 2006. Total Mac unit sales in Japan declined 1% during 2007. The decrease in the Japan segment's overall net sales was primarily attributable to decreases in iPod and Mac desktop sales, partially offset by an increase in revenue from MacBooks and sales of third-party content from the iTunes Store. The decline in net sales and Mac unit sales is partially attributable to Japan's declining consumer PC market, and the iPod sales decline is primarily due to lower average selling prices. The Company is continuing to evaluate ways to improve the future results of its Japan segment. Japan's net sales increased $287 million or 31% during 2006 compared to 2005. The Japan segment experienced increased net sales in iPods, Mac portable products, and other music related products and services. Consistent with the Company's other segments, Japan experienced increases in sales of iPods due to the introduction of the iPod with video-playing capabilities (now referred to as the iPod classic) and the iPod nano in October and September of 2005, respectively. Japan also experienced strong sales of the Intel-based MacBook and increased sales from the iTunes Store. These increases were partially offset by decreases in net sales of Mac desktop products, displays, and Mac OS X. The decreases in desktop products and displays reflect the overall shift in product mix toward portable Mac systems. Mac OS X sales have decreased from 2005 since the Company had not released a new version of Mac OS X since Tiger began shipping in April 2005. Total Mac unit sales during 2006 remained relatively flat compared to 2005. Retail The Company opened 32 new retail stores during 2007, including a total of 5 international stores in the U.K. and Italy, bringing the total number of open stores to 197 as of September 29, 2007. This compares to 165 open stores as of September 30, 2006 and 124 open stores as of September 24, 2005. The Retail segment's net sales increased by 27% to $4.1 billion during 2007 compared to 2006. Retail segment Mac unit sales increased 56% during 2007 as compared to 2006. With an average of 178 stores open during 2007, average revenue per store was $23.1 million, compared to $22.9 million in 2006 and $21.7 million in 2005. The current year increase in Retail segment net sales was primarily due to stronger sales of Mac portable products, iMacs, accessories and services. The increase was partially offset primarily by lower net sales of iPods and other music related products due to the expanded availability of those products through third-party resellers. The Retail segment's net sales increased by 42% to $3.3 billion during 2006 compared to 2005. Retail segment Mac unit sales increased 45% during 2006 compared to 2005. The current year increase was primarily due to strong sales of Mac portable and desktop products, iPods, and other music related products and services. Sales of iPods increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated iPod with video-playing capabilities in October 2005 and the iPod nano during September 2005. The increase in other music related products and services was due to increased sales of Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. Mac portable and desktop sales increased due to strong sales of the Intel-based MacBook, MacBook Pro, and iMac. As measured by the Company's operating segment reporting, the Retail segment reported operating income of $875 million during 2007 as compared to operating income of $600 million and $396 million during 2006 and 2005, respectively. This improvement in 2007 was primarily attributable to an increase in the Company's overall gross margin percentage. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital asset purchases associated with the Retail segment were $294 million in 2007, bringing the total capital asset purchases since inception of the Retail segment to $1.0 billion. As of September 29, 2007, the Retail segment had approximately 7,900 employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with retail store space and related facilities of $1.1 billion. The Company would incur substantial costs if it were to close multiple retail stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company's financial condition and operating results. Other Segments The Company's Other Segments, which consists of its Asia Pacific and FileMaker operations, experienced an increase in net sales of $406 million, or 30% during 2007 compared to 2006. This increase related primarily to a 58% increase in sales of Mac portable products and strong iPod sales in the Company's Asia Pacific region. During 2006, net sales in Other Segments increased 35% compared to 2005 primarily due to an increase in sales of iPod and Mac portable products. Strong sales growth was a result of the introduction of the updated iPods featuring video-playing capabilities and the new Intel-based Mac portable products that translated to a 16% increase in Mac unit sales during 2006 compared to 2005. Gross Margin Gross margin for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): Gross margin percentage of 34.0% in 2007 increased significantly from 29.0% in 2006. The primary drivers of this increase were more favorable costs on certain commodity components, including NAND flash memory and DRAM memory, higher overall revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production costs and a higher percentage of revenue from the Company's direct sales channels. The Company anticipates that its gross margin and the gross margins of the personal computer, consumer electronics and mobile communication industries will be subject to pressure due to price competition. The Company expects gross margin percentage to decline sequentially in the first quarter of 2008 primarily as a result of the full-quarter impact of product transitions and reduced pricing that were effected in the fourth quarter of 2007, lower sales of iLife and iWork in their second quarter of availability, seasonally higher component costs, and a higher mix of indirect sales. These factors are expected to be partially offset by higher sales of the Company's Mac OS X operating system due to the introduction of Mac OS X Version 10.5 Leopard ("Mac OS X Leopard") that became available in October 2007. The foregoing statements regarding the Company's expected gross margin percentage are forward-looking. There can be no assurance that current gross margin percentage will be maintained or targeted gross margin percentage levels will be achieved. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services, and a potential shift in the Company's sales mix towards products with lower gross margins. In response to these competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company's ability to effectively manage product quality and warranty costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company's significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. The Company orders components for its products and builds inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third-parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products or components. The Company's financial condition and operating results in the past have been and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and outstanding purchase commitments and to respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. Gross margin percentage of 29.0% in 2006 remained flat compared to 2005. The Company experienced more favorable pricing on certain commodity components including LCD flat-panel displays and DRAM memory and higher overall revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production costs, offset by an increase in lower margin iPod sales and other music-related services. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development ("R&D") Expenditures for R&D increased 10% or $70 million to $782 million in 2007 compared to 2006. R&D expense does not include capitalized software development costs of $75 million related to the development of Mac OS X Leopard and iPhone. The increases in R&D expense were primarily due to an increase in R&D headcount in the current year to support expanded R&D activities, partially offset by one less week of expenses in the first quarter of 2007 and the capitalized software development costs mentioned above. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company's core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to increase spending in R&D to remain competitive. Selling, General, and Administrative Expense ("SG&A") Expenditures for SG&A increased $530 million or 22% during 2007 compared to 2006. The increase was primarily due to higher direct and indirect channel variable selling expenses resulting from the significant year-over-year increase in total net sales in 2007, the Company's continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, and a current year increase in spending on marketing and advertising, partially offset by one less week of expenses in the first quarter of 2007. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions): Total other income and expense increased $234 million or 64% to $599 million during 2007 as compared to $365 million and $165 million in 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in 2007 is attributable primarily to increased interest received from higher cash and short-term investment balances and stronger investment yields resulting from higher average market interest rates partially offset by one less week of interest income earned in 2007. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased to 5.27% in 2007 as compared to the 4.58% and 2.70% rates earned during 2006 and 2005, respectively. The current year increase in interest income was partially offset by higher other expense, which was primarily associated with higher foreign currency hedging expenses. During 2007, 2006 and 2005, the Company had no debt outstanding and accordingly did not incur any interest expense. Provision for Income Taxes The Company's effective tax rate for the year ended September 29, 2007 was 30%. The Company's effective rate differs from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. In addition, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $63 million due to the settlement of prior year audits in the U.S. As of September 29, 2007, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $1.1 billion before being offset against certain deferred liabilities and a valuation allowance for presentation on the Company's balance sheet. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. As of September 29, 2007 and September 30, 2006 a valuation allowance of $5 million was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of state operating losses that may not be realized. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") has completed its field audit of the Company's federal income tax returns for the years 2002 through 2003 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company intends to contest certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. All IRS audit issues for years prior to 2002 have been resolved. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. Should any issues addressed in the Company's tax audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with management's expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution occurs. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In February 2007, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued SFAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities-including an amendment of FASB Statement No. 115 ("SFAS No. 159"). SFAS No. 159 allows companies to choose to elect measuring eligible financial instruments and certain other items at fair value that are not required to be measured at fair value. SFAS No. 159 requires that unrealized gains and losses on items for which the fair value option has been elected be reported in earnings at each reporting date. SFAS No. 159 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and is required to be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 159, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company's financial condition or operating results. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements, which defines fair value, provides a framework for measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures required for fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 applies to other accounting pronouncements that require fair value measurements; it does not require any new fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and is required to be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 157, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company's financial condition or operating results. In June 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No. ("FIN") 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes-an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109. FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes by creating a framework for how companies should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in their financial statements uncertain tax positions that they have taken or expect to take in a tax return. FIN 48 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2006 and is required to be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2008. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of FIN 48, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company's financial condition or operating results. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions): As of September 29, 2007, the Company had $15.4 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, an increase of $5.3 billion over the same balance at the end of September 30, 2006. The principal components of this net increase were cash generated by operating activities of $5.5 billion, proceeds from the issuance of common stock under stock plans of $365 million and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation of $377 million. These increases were partially offset by payments for acquisitions of property, plant, and equipment of $735 million and payments for acquisitions of intangible assets of $251 million. The Company's short-term investment portfolio is primarily invested in highly rated, liquid investments. As of September 29, 2007 and September 30, 2006, $6.5 billion and $4.1 billion, respectively, of the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Capital Assets The Company's total capital asset purchases were $822 million during 2007, consisting of $294 million for retail store facilities and $528 million for real estate acquisitions and corporate infrastructure including information systems enhancements. Of the $822 million in total capital asset purchases during 2007, $87 million were not yet paid for as of September 29, 2007. The Company currently anticipates it will utilize approximately $1.1 billion for capital asset purchases during 2008, including approximately $400 million for expansion of the Company's Retail segment, and approximately $700 million to support normal replacement of existing capital assets, including manufacturing related equipment, enhancements to general information technology infrastructure, and real estate acquisitions. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 29, 2007 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Company's balance sheet as current liabilities (in millions): Lease Commitments As of September 29, 2007, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of $1.4 billion, $1.1 billion of which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. Lease terms on the Company's existing major facility operating leases generally range from 3 to 15 years. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company's products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company's forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. In addition, the Company has an off-balance sheet warranty obligation for products accounted for under subscription accounting pursuant to SOP No. 97-2 whereby the Company recognizes warranty expense as incurred. As of September 29, 2007, the Company had outstanding off-balance sheet third-party manufacturing commitments, component purchase commitments, and warranty commitments of $3.2 billion. During the first quarter of 2006, the Company entered into long-term supply agreements with Hynix Semiconductor, Inc., Intel Corporation, Micron Technology, Inc., Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., and Toshiba Corporation to secure supply of NAND flash memory through calendar year 2010. As part of these agreements, the Company prepaid $1.25 billion for flash memory components during 2006, which will be applied to certain inventory purchases made over the life of each respective agreement. The Company utilized $208 million of the prepayment as of September 29, 2007. Asset Retirement Obligations The Company's asset retirement obligations are associated with commitments to return property subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. As of September 29, 2007, the Company estimated that gross expected future cash flows of $24 million would be required to fulfill these obligations. Other Obligations Other outstanding obligations were $50 million as of September 29, 2007, primarily related to Internet and telecommunications services and the estimated cost related to the $100 store credit the Company offered to customers who purchased an iPhone prior to the Company's September 2007 price reduction. Indemnifications The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against itself or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a liability related to unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would have a material adverse effect on its financial condition or operating results. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled “Risk Factors” above. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to the Company’s fiscal years ended in September and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. The following information has been adjusted to reflect the restatement of the Company’s financial results, which is more fully described in the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and in Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. The net of tax impact of the adjustments, which amounted to $4 million in 2006, was recorded by the Company in its fourth quarter of 2006. The net of tax impact of the restatements on the Company’s results of operations amounted to $7 million and $10 million in 2005 and 2004, respectively. The impact of these adjustments was not significant to the Company’s operating results, trends, or liquidity for the annual or quarterly periods in 2006, 2005, and 2004. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions. The Company also designs, develops, and markets a line of portable digital music players along with related accessories and services including the online distribution of third-party music, audio books, music videos, short films, television shows, movies, and iPod games. The Company’s products and services include the Macintosh line of desktop and notebook computers, the iPod line of portable digital music players, the Xserve server and Xserve RAID storage products, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the Mac OS X operating system, the iTunes Store, a portfolio of peripherals that support and enhance the Macintosh and iPod product lines, and a variety of other service and support offerings. The Company sells its products worldwide through its online stores, its retail stores, its direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, resellers, and value-added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Macintosh and iPod compatible products including application software, printers, storage devices, speakers, headphones, and various other accessories and supplies through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to education, consumer, creative professional, business, and government customers. A further description of the Company’s products may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Business.” The Company believes that for both professionals and consumers the personal computer has become the center of an evolving digital lifestyle by integrating and enhancing the utility of advanced digital devices such as the Company’s iPods, digital video and still cameras, televisions, CD and DVD players, cellular phones, personal digital assistants, and other consumer electronic devices. The attributes of the personal computer that enable this functionality include a high-quality user interface, easy access to relatively inexpensive data storage, the ability to run complex applications, and the ability to connect easily to a wide variety of other digital devices and to the Internet. The Company is the only participant in the personal computer industry that controls the design and development of the entire personal computer-from the hardware and operating system to sophisticated applications. This, along with its products’ innovative industrial designs, intuitive ease-of-use, built-in graphics, multimedia and networking capabilities, uniquely positions the Company to offer innovative integrated digital lifestyle solutions. The Company’s business strategy leverages its ability, through the design and development of its own operating system, hardware, and many software applications and technologies, to bring to its customers around the world compelling new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative industrial design. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including personal computers with its Macintosh line of computers, consumer electronics with its iPod line of portable digital music players, and distribution of third-party digital content through its online iTunes Store. While the Company is widely recognized as an innovator in the personal computer and consumer electronic markets as well as a leader in the emerging market for distribution of digital content, these are all highly competitive markets that are subject to aggressive pricing and increased competition. To remain competitive, the Company believes increased investment in research and development (“R&D”) and marketing and advertising is necessary to maintain and extend its position in the markets where it competes. The Company’s R&D spending is focused on delivering timely updates and enhancements to its existing line of personal computers, displays, operating systems, software applications, and portable digital music players; developing new digital lifestyle consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new product areas such as rack-mount servers, RAID storage systems, and wireless technologies. The Company also believes investment in marketing and advertising programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness. In June 2005, the Company announced its plan to begin using Intel microprocessors in its computers. During 2006, the Company introduced new Intel-based models of the MacBook Pro, MacBook, Mac Pro, iMac, and Mac mini computers. The Company’s transition to Intel microprocessors for Macintosh systems was completed in August 2006, and its transition for Xserve was completed in November 2006. The MacBook Pro, MacBook, Mac Pro, iMac, and Mac mini feature Mac OS X version 10.4 Tiger, iLife ‘06, and the Company’s new translation technology, Rosetta, which allows most PowerPC-based Macintosh applications to run on Intel-based Macintosh computers. There are potential risks and uncertainties that may occur due to this transition, which are further discussed in Item 1A under the heading “Risk Factors.” The Company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels. The Company believes sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration, demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available only on Macintosh computers, and demonstrate the compatibility of the Macintosh with the Windows platform and networks. The Company further believes providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting and retaining customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company has expanded and improved its distribution capabilities by opening its own retail stores in the U.S. and internationally. The Company had 165 stores open as of September 30, 2006. The Company also staffs selected third-party stores with the Company’s own employees to improve the buying experience through reseller channels. The Company has deployed Apple employees and contractors in reseller locations around the world including the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Australia. The Company also sells to customers directly through its online stores around the world. To improve access to the iPod product line, the Company has significantly expanded the number of distribution points where iPods are sold. The iPod product line can be purchased in certain department stores, member-only warehouse stores, large retail chains, and specialty retail stores, as well as through the channels listed above. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, stock-based compensation, and income taxes. Management believes these policies to be critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, peripherals, digital content, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting standards, including American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Statement of Position (“SOP”) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as amended, and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) No. 104, Revenue Recognition. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped, and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable, revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable and all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. For transactions involving price protection, the Company recognizes revenue net of the estimated amount to be refunded, provided the refund amount can be reasonably and reliably estimated and the other conditions for revenue recognition have been met. If refunds cannot be reliably estimated, revenue is not recognized until reliable estimates can be made or the price protection lapses. For customer incentive programs, the estimated cost of these programs is recognized at the later of the date at which the Company has sold the product or the date at which the program is offered. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company distributes its products through third-party distributors and resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and commercial customers. The Company generally does not require collateral from its customers; however, the Company will require collateral in certain instances to limit credit risk. In addition, when possible, the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in Latin America, Europe, Asia, and Australia and by arranging with third-party financing companies to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the Company’s direct customers. These credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company generally does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements. However, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral, third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company’s distribution and retail channel partners. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management’s assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of the credit worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. The Company records an allowance to reduce the specific receivables to the amount that is reasonably believed to be collectible. The Company also records an allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors including historical experience with bad debts, the general economic environment, the financial condition of the Company’s distribution channels, and the aging of such receivables. If there is a deterioration of a major customer’s financial condition, if the Company becomes aware of additional information related to the credit worthiness of a major customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Company may have to adjust its allowance for doubtful accounts, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments were made. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The personal computer and consumer electronic industries are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs which would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the write-downs were recorded. The Company accrues reserves for estimated cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled or are expected to be cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company’s requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional reserves for cancellation fees that would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the cancellation fees are identified. Warranty Costs The Company provides currently for the estimated cost for hardware and software warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could negatively affect the Company’s results of operations. The Company periodically provides updates to its applications and system software to maintain the software’s compliance with specifications. The estimated cost to develop such updates is accounted for as warranty costs that are recognized at the time related software revenue is recognized. Factors considered in determining appropriate accruals related to such updates include the number of units delivered, the number of updates expected to occur, and the historical cost and estimated future cost of the resources necessary to develop these updates. Stock-Based Compensation The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123R. Under the provisions of SFAS No. 123R, stock-based compensation cost is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value as calculated by the Black-Scholes-Merton (“BSM”) option-pricing model and is recognized as expense ratably over the requisite service period. The BSM model requires various highly judgmental assumptions including volatility, forfeiture rates, and expected option life. If any of the assumptions used in the BSM model change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially in the future from that recorded in the current period. In connection with the Company’s restatement of its consolidated financial statements, the Company has applied judgment in choosing whether to revise measurement dates for prior option grants. Information regarding the restatement, including ranges of possible additional stock-based compensation expense if other measurement dates had been selected for certain grants, is set forth in the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and in Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Similarly, if the Company subsequently realizes deferred tax assets that were previously determined to be unrealizable, the respective valuation allowance would be reversed, resulting in a positive adjustment to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations and financial position. Net Sales Net sales and Macintosh unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product follow (net sales in millions and unit sales in thousands): Notes: (a) Other Segments include Asia Pacific and FileMaker. (b) Includes iMac, eMac, Mac mini, Mac Pro, Power Mac, and Xserve product lines. (c) Includes MacBook, iBook, MacBook Pro, and PowerBook product lines. (d) Consists of iTunes Store sales, iPod services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (e) Includes sales of Apple-branded and third-party displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories. (f) Includes sales of Apple-branded operating system, application software, third-party software, AppleCare, and Internet services. (g) Derived by dividing total Macintosh net sales by total Macintosh unit sales. (h) Derived by dividing total iPod net sales by total iPod unit sales. Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Net sales during 2006 increased 39% or $5.4 billion from 2005. This increase was due in part to the fact that 2006 spanned 53 weeks while 2005 spanned 52 weeks. Several other factors contributed to these increases including the following: · Net sales of iPods increased $3.1 billion or 69% during 2006 compared to 2005. Unit sales of iPods totaled 39.4 million in 2006, which represents an increase of 75% from 22.5 million iPod units sold in 2005. Strong iPod sales during 2006 reflected significant sales of both the hard-drive based iPod that supports video, first introduced in October of 2005 and the iPod nano, introduced in September 2005, as well as continued expansion of iPod distribution points. During 2006, the net sales per iPod unit sold decreased by 3% compared to 2005 primarily due to an overall decrease in average selling prices for all iPods as well as a shift in product mix to the iPod nano. From the introduction of the iPod in 2002 through 2006, the Company has sold approximately 68 million iPods. · Macintosh net sales increased $1.1 billion or 18% during 2006 compared to 2005. Macintosh unit sales increased by 769,000 units or 17% during 2006 compared to 2005. These increases were mainly due to strong demand for the Intel-based MacBook and MacBook Pro systems and reflect a shift in product mix to portable products in all of the Company’s operating segments. Net sales and unit sales of the Company’s portable products increased 43% and 42%, respectively, during 2006 compared to 2005. Macintosh desktop net sales and unit sales both decreased by 3% during 2006 compared to 2005. The decrease in sales of the Company’s Macintosh desktops was due to declines in sales of the Company’s professional-oriented desktop products. The Company believes the decline in the Company’s professional-oriented desktop products was due to customers delaying purchases of such products in anticipation of the release of the Intel-based Mac Pro, which did not begin shipping until August 2006, and updated software applications capable of running on Intel-based Macintosh computers, and the trend toward portable computers. A slight increase of 1% during 2006 in net sales per Macintosh unit sold was due to a shift in mix to higher-priced portable products, partially offset by price reductions on certain Macintosh systems. · Other music related products and services consists of sales associated with the iTunes Store and iPod services and accessories. Net sales of other music related products and services increased $986 million or 110% during 2006 compared to 2005. The increase was primarily due to increased net sales from the iTunes Store and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories and services. The increase in sales from the iTunes Store stemmed from significant growth in U.S. sales and the opening of The iTunes Store in Japan during August 2005 and Australia during October 2005. The increased sales from the iTunes Store were also attributable to the availability of videos, television shows, and feature-length movie downloads. · Net sales of software, service, and other sales increased $188 million or 17% during 2006 compared to 2005. The growth was primarily attributable to increased net sales of AppleCare Protection Plan (“APP”) extended service and support contracts and application software, partially offset by a decrease in sales of Mac OS X. Mac OS X sales were particularly high in 2005 due to the release of Mac OS X Tiger in April 2005. Offsetting the favorable factors discussed above, the Company’s net sales during 2006 were negatively impacted by the following: · Net sales of peripherals and other hardware declined $26 million or 2% compared to 2005 primarily due to price decreases and a decrease in net sales of displays relating to a shift in mix from desktop to portable systems. The decrease in net sales of displays for 2006 is consistent with the overall decrease in unit sales of Macintosh professional desktop systems. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 During 2005, net sales increased 68% or $5.7 billion from 2004. Several factors contributed favorably to net sales during 2005: · Net sales of iPods rose $3.2 billion or 248% during 2005 compared to 2004. Unit sales of iPods totaled 22.5 million in 2005, which represented an increase of 409% from the 4.4 million iPod units sold in 2004. Strong sales of iPods during 2005 were experienced in all of the Company’s operating segments and was driven by strong demand for the iPod shuffle introduced in January 2005, the release of an updated version of the iPod mini in February 2005, the release of the iPod nano in September 2005, and expansion of the iPod’s distribution network. Net sales per iPod unit sold decreased 32% primarily due to the introduction of the lower priced iPod shuffle in January 2005 and iPod mini pricing reductions in February 2005. From the introduction of the iPod in 2002 through 2005, the Company had sold approximately 28 million iPods. · Net sales of other music related products and services increased $621 million or 223% during 2005 compared to 2004. The Company experienced strong growth in sales of iPod services and accessories consistent with the increase in overall iPod unit sales for 2005. The increased sales from the iTunes Store were primarily due to substantial growth of net sales in the U.S. and expansion in Europe, Canada, and Japan. · Total Macintosh net sales increased $1.4 billion or 27% during 2005 compared to 2004. Unit sales of Macintosh systems increased 1.2 million units or 38% during 2005 compared to 2004. The increases in Macintosh net sales and unit sales related primarily to strong demand for the Company’s desktop products, which was experienced in all of the Company’s operating segments. The Company believes that the success of the iPod had a positive impact on Macintosh net sales by introducing new customers to the Company’s other products. Desktop demand was stimulated in 2005 due to the iMac G5 and the introduction of the Mac mini in January 2005. Net sales and unit sales of desktop products increased 45% and 55%, respectively, during 2005 compared to 2004. Macintosh net sales and unit sales also included sales of the Company’s portable products, which increased 11% and 21%, respectively, compared to 2004. Net sales per Macintosh unit sold decreased 7% on a year-over-year basis. The decrease was the result of changes in the overall unit mix towards relatively lower-priced consumer products, specifically the impact of the Mac mini product, and desktop and portable price reductions. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in the proportion of direct sales. · Net sales of peripherals and other hardware rose by 18% during 2005 compared to 2004 primarily due to an increase in net sales of displays and other computer accessories. Net sales of other hardware include AirPort cards and base stations, Xserve RAID storage, iSight digital video cameras, and third-party hardware products. · Net sales of software, service and other sales rose $270 million or 33% during 2005 compared to 2004. This growth was primarily attributable to increased net sales in APP extended service and support contracts, driven primarily by higher associated Macintosh computer sales. Additionally, the Company experienced increases in net sales of .Mac Internet service, professional and consumer applications, third-party software, and Mac OS X that was primarily attributable to the release of version 10.4 Tiger in April 2005. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments are comprised of the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The Americas, Europe, and Japan reportable segments do not include activities related to the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Retail segment operated Apple-owned retail stores in the U.S., Canada, Japan, and the U.K. during 2006. Each reportable geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Americas During 2006, net sales in the Americas segment increased $2.7 billion, or 41%, compared to 2005. The main factors for this increase were significant increases in net sales of iPods, other music related products and services, Macintosh portable systems, and APP. Sales of iPods increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated iPod with video-playing capabilities in October 2005 and the iPod nano during September 2005. The increase in other music related products and services was due to increases in sales of Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories and sales from the iTunes Store. The increase in sales of Macintosh portable systems in the Americas was due to strong sales of the Intel-based MacBook and MacBook Pro during 2006. The overall increase in net sales was partially offset by a decline in net sales of desktops, displays, and Mac OS X. The decrease in desktop products and displays net sales reflects the overall shift in product mix toward portable Macintosh systems. Mac OS X sales decreased from 2005 since the Company has not released a new version of Mac OS X since Tiger began shipping in April 2005. During 2006, the Americas segment represented approximately 48% of the Company’s total net sales as compared to 47% in the same period of 2005. During 2006, U.S. education channel net sales and Macintosh unit sales increased by 13% and 11%, respectively, compared to 2005. Net sales from the higher education market grew 22% during 2006 compared to 2005 due to strong sales of Macintosh portable products and iPods. Net sales were relatively flat for K-12 due to continued budget constraints. During 2005, net sales in the Americas segment grew 64% or $2.6 billion compared to 2004. The increase in net sales during 2005 was primarily attributable to the significant year-over-year increase in iPod sales, sales of other music related products and services, and strong sales of desktop and portable Macintosh systems. This increase was partially offset by a shift in sales to the Retail segment, which had 117 stores in the U.S. and Canada as of the end of 2005. Macintosh unit sales also increased by 30% in 2005 compared to 2004, driven primarily by strong sales of desktop systems largely attributable to strong sales from the updated iMac, which began shipping in September 2004, and the Mac mini, which was introduced in January 2005. During 2005 and 2004, the Americas segment represented approximately 47% and 49%, respectively, of the Company’s total net sales and represented approximately 48% and 51%, respectively, of total Macintosh unit sales. The Company experienced an increase in both U.S. education channel net sales and unit sales of 21% for 2005 compared to 2004. Strength in higher education sales related primarily to strong iMac and portable system shipments. This strength drove year-over-year growth in net sales of 32% for the higher education channel during 2005. Despite challenges in the K-12 market from continued budget constraints and competitive pressures, the Company’s K-12 net sales grew year-over-year by 11% during 2005 due to increased iBook sales and 1:1 education sales. Europe Europe segment net sales increased $1.0 billion or 33% during 2006 compared to 2005. Consistent with the Americas segment, these increases were a result of strong growth in iPod sales, other music related products and services, and Macintosh portable systems. Sales of iPods increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated iPod with video-playing capabilities in October 2005 and the iPod nano during September 2005. The increase in other music related products and services was due to increases in sales of Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories and sales from the iTunes Store. The increase in sales of portable systems in Europe was due to strong sales of the Intel-based MacBook and MacBook Pro that were introduced during 2006. In addition, Europe also reported increased sales in APP related to the increase in Macintosh unit sales. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in desktop and Mac OS X net sales during 2006 compared to 2005. The decrease in desktop net sales was due to the shift in product mix toward portable Macintosh systems. Mac OS X sales have decreased from 2005 since the Company has not released a new version of Mac OS X since Tiger began shipping in April 2005. During 2005, net sales in the Europe segment grew $1.3 billion or 71% from 2004. Total Macintosh unit sales in Europe also experienced growth during the current year by increasing 47% in 2005 compared to 2004. Consistent with the Americas segment, Europe experienced strong net sales of desktop products, iPod, other music related products and services, and software and service sales. Demand in Europe during 2005 was particularly strong for the Company’s desktop computers, which experienced a year-over-year increase of 56% from 2004. Similar to the results of the Company’s other segments, net sales of iPods, peripherals and software were strong in 2005. Japan Japan’s net sales increased $288 million or 31% during 2006 compared to 2005. The Japan segment experienced increased net sales in iPods, Macintosh portable products, and other music related products and services. Consistent with the Company’s other segments, Japan experienced increases in sales of iPods due to the introduction of the iPod with video-playing capabilities and the iPod nano in October and September of 2005, respectively. Japan also experienced strong sales of the Intel-based MacBook and increased sales from the iTunes Store. These increases were partially offset by decreases in net sales of Macintosh desktop products, displays, and Mac OS X. The decreases in desktop products and displays reflect the overall shift in product mix toward portable Macintosh systems. Mac OS X sales have decreased from 2005 since the Company has not released a new version of Mac OS X since Tiger began shipping in April 2005. Total Macintosh unit sales during 2006 remained relatively flat compared to 2005. The relatively flat growth in Macintosh unit sales is partially attributable to Japan’s overall slow consumer PC market growth. The Company is continuing to evaluate ways to improve its indirect and direct channel sales in Japan. Japan’s net sales and Macintosh unit sales were up 36% and 8%, respectively, during 2005 compared to 2004. Japan experienced increased net sales in desktop products, iPod, and other music related products and services. Desktop net sales and unit sales increased by 31% and 41%, respectively, and iPod sales increased by 220% during 2005 compared to 2004. The overall increase in net sales was partially offset by a decline in portable system net sales during 2005 compared to 2004, which the Company believes might have been attributable to a shift in sales from portables to the iMac G5 and Mac mini, and a shift to the Retail segment as a result of opening two additional stores in Japan during 2005. Retail The Company opened 41 new retail stores during 2006, including a total of 10 international stores in the U.K., Japan, and Canada, bringing the total number of open stores to 165 as of September 30, 2006. This compares to 124 open stores as of September 24, 2005 and 86 open stores as of September 25, 2004. The Retail segment’s net sales increased by 43% to $3.4 billion during 2006 compared to 2005. Retail segment Macintosh unit sales increased 45% during 2006 compared to 2005. With an average of 142 stores open during 2006, average revenue per store increased to $23.6 million compared to $22.4 million during 2005 and $15.6 million in 2004. The current year increase was primarily due to strong sales of Macintosh portable and desktop products, iPods, and other music related products and services. Sales of iPods increased primarily due to the introduction of the updated iPod with video-playing capabilities in October 2005 and the iPod nano during September 2005. The increase in other music related products and services was due to increased sales of Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. Macintosh portable and desktop sales increased due to strong sales of the Intel-based MacBook, MacBook Pro, and iMac. As measured by the Company’s operating segment reporting, the Retail segment reported operating income of $198 million during 2006 as compared to operating income of $151 million during 2005 and operating income of $39 million during 2004. This improvement was primarily attributable to the impact of opening new stores and the segment’s year-over-year increase in average revenue per store, which resulted in higher leverage on occupancy, depreciation, and other fixed costs. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital expenditures associated with the Retail segment were $200 million in 2006, bringing the total capital expenditures since inception of the Retail segment to approximately $729 million. As of September 30, 2006, the Retail segment had approximately 5,787 employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with retail store space and related facilities of approximately $887 million. The Company would incur substantial costs if it were to close its retail stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations and financial condition. Gross Margin Gross margin for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): (1) See the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Gross margin percentage of 29.0% in 2006 remained flat as compared to 2005. The Company experienced more favorable pricing on certain commodity components including LCD flat-panel displays and DRAM memory and higher overall revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production costs, offset by an increase in lower margin iPod sales and other music-related services. The Company anticipates that its gross margin and the gross margins of the personal computer and consumer electronics industries will be under pressure due to price competition. The Company expects gross margin percentage to decline sequentially in the first quarter of 2007 primarily as a result of a shift in the mix of revenue toward lower margin products such as the iPod and content from the iTunes Store. The foregoing statements regarding the Company’s expected gross margin percentage are forward-looking. There can be no assurance that current gross margin percentage will be maintained or targeted gross margin percentage levels will be achieved. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products, including iPods, will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services, and potential changes to the Company’s product mix, including higher unit sales of consumer products with lower average selling prices and lower gross margins. In response to these competitive pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to effectively manage product quality and warranty costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. The Company orders components for its products and builds inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company’s markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third-parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products or components. The Company’s operating results and financial condition in the past have been and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company’s ability to manage its inventory levels and outstanding purchase commitments and to respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. Gross margin percentage increased in 2005 to 29.0% of net sales from 27.3% of net sales in 2004. The Company’s gross margin during 2005 increased due to more favorable pricing on certain commodity components including LCD flat-panel displays and DRAM memory; an increase in higher margin software sales; a favorable shift in direct sales related primarily to the Company’s retail and online stores; and higher overall revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production costs. These increases to gross margin were partially offset by an increase in lower margin iPod sales. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): (1) See the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. Research and Development (R&D) Expenditures for R&D increased 33% or $177 million to $712 million in 2006 compared to $535 million in 2005. The increase was due primarily to an increase in R&D headcount in the current year to support expanded R&D activities, an increase of $46 million in stock-based compensation recognized as R&D expense resulting from the adoption of SFAS No. 123R, and higher overall expenses due to the 14th week added to the first fiscal quarter of 2006 to realign the Company’s fiscal quarters with calendar quarters. In addition, during 2005, the Company capitalized approximately $29.7 million of costs associated with the development of Mac OS X Tiger. No software development costs were capitalized during 2006. Further information related to the Company’s capitalization of software development costs may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Despite the increase in expenditures, R&D as a percentage of net sales remained relatively flat in 2006 as compared to 2005 due to the significant increase in revenue. The Company continues to believe that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. As such, the Company expects to make further investments in R&D to remain competitive. Selling, General, and Administrative Expense (SG&A) Expenditures for SG&A increased $569 million or 31% during 2006 compared to 2005. These increases are due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, an increase of $50 million in stock-based compensation expense recognized as SG&A expense resulting from the adoption of SFAS No. 123R, a current year increase in discretionary spending on marketing and advertising, higher direct and channel selling expenses resulting from the increase in net sales and employee salary merit increases, and the expenses associated with the 14th week added to the first fiscal quarter of 2006. Despite the increase in expenditures, SG&A as a percentage of total net sales in 2006 remained flat as compared to 2005. Expenditures for SG&A increased $434 million or 30% during 2005 compared to 2004. These increases are due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, a current year increase in discretionary spending on marketing and advertising, and higher direct and channel selling expenses resulting from the increase in net sales and employee salary merit increases. SG&A as a percentage of total net sales in 2005 was 13%, down from 17% in 2004, which is due to the increase in total net sales of 68% for the Company during 2005. Fiscal 2004 Restructuring Actions During 2004, the Company recorded total restructuring charges of approximately $23.0 million, including approximately $14.0 million in severance costs, $5.5 million in asset impairments, and $3.5 million for lease cancellations. The lease cancellations relate to vacating a leased sales facility as a result of a European workforce reduction during 2004. Of the $23.0 million charges, $21.3 million had been utilized by the end of 2006, with the remainder consisting of $1.7 million for lease cancellations. These actions resulted in the termination of 452 positions. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions): Gains and Losses on Non-current Investments The Company previously held significant investments in ARM Holdings plc (ARM), Akamai Technologies, Inc. (Akamai), and EarthLink Network, Inc. (EarthLink). The Company sold all of the remaining holdings in these non-current investments in 2004 and 2003. Pretax gains recorded upon the sale of these non-current investments were $4 million in 2004. Interest and Other Income, Net Total interest and other income, net increased $200 million or 121% to $365 million during 2006 compared to $165 million in 2005 and $53 million in 2004. These increases are attributable primarily to higher cash and short-term investment balances and increasing investment yields resulting from higher market interest rates and the 14th week added to the first fiscal quarter of 2006. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased to 4.58% in 2006 compared to the 2.70% and 1.38% rates earned during 2005 and 2004, respectively. The current year increase in other income was partially offset by higher foreign currency hedging expenses. Interest expense in 2004 consisted primarily of interest on the Company’s $300 million aggregate principal amount unsecured notes, which were repaid upon their maturity in February 2004. The unsecured notes were sold at 99.925% of par for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. Total deferred gain resulting from the closure of debt swaps of approximately $23 million was fully amortized as of the notes’ maturity in February 2004. Provision for Income Taxes The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended September 30, 2006 was approximately 29%. The Company’s effective rate differs from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. In addition, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $20 million due to settlement of prior year tax audits in the U.S., and a net benefit of $20 million resulting from the dividend repatriation under the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (“AJCA”) and international tax planning strategies associated with the repatriation as further discussed below. As of September 30, 2006, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $739 million before being offset against certain deferred liabilities and a valuation allowance for presentation on the Company’s balance sheet. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. As of September 30, 2006 and September 24, 2005, a valuation allowance of $5 million was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of state operating losses that may not be realized. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. On October 22, 2004, the AJCA was signed into law. The AJCA included a provision for the deduction of 85% of certain foreign earnings that were repatriated, as defined in the AJCA, within a specified time frame. Among other requirements, dividends qualifying for the 85% deduction must be reinvested in the United States in certain qualified investments pursuant to a domestic reinvestment plan approved by the CEO and Board of Directors. During 2006, the Company repatriated approximately $1.6 billion of foreign earnings. Of the earnings repatriated, $755 million is eligible for the reduced tax rate provided by the AJCA. Accordingly, the Company recorded a tax charge of $51 million related to the repatriation of foreign earnings under the provisions of the AJCA. In addition, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $71 million resulting from the implementation of tax planning strategies to recognize deferred tax assets that were previously not recognizable within certain foreign subsidiaries. The Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) has substantially completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for the years 2002 through 2003 and proposed certain adjustments. The Company intends to contest certain of these adjustments through the IRS Appeals Office. Substantially all IRS audit issues for years prior to 2002 have been resolved. In addition, the Company is subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. Should any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution occurs. Quarterly Financial Information The following tables set forth a summary of the Company’s quarterly financial information for each of the four quarters in the years ended September 30, 2006 and September 24, 2005 (in millions, except share and per share amounts): (1) Includes stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows: The net of tax impact of the stock-based compensation adjustments in 2006, which amounted to $4 million, was recorded by the Company in its fourth quarter of 2006 and are described in the Explanatory Note immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. (1) See the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. (2) Includes stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows: The impact of the stock-based compensation adjustments as described in the Explanatory Note immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K was not significant to the interim balance sheets of 2006 and 2005. The following tables present the effects of adjustments made to the Company’s previously reported quarterly financial information during 2005 (in millions, except per share amounts): (1) See the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. (2) Includes stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows: (1) See the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. (2) Includes stock-based compensation expense, which was allocated as follows: Recent Accounting Pronouncements In September 2006, the SEC issued SAB No. 108, Considering the Effects of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in Current Year Financial Statements. SAB No. 108 provides guidance on how prior year misstatements should be considered when quantifying misstatements in current year financial statements for purposes of determining whether the current year’s financial statements are materially misstated. SAB No. 108 is effective for fiscal years ending after November 15, 2006. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SAB No. 108, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial position. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements, which defines fair value, provides a framework for measuring fair value, and expands the disclosures required for fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 applies to other accounting pronouncements that require fair value measurements; it does not require any new fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and is required to be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 157, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial position. In June 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No. (“FIN”) 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes-an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109. FIN No. 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes by creating a framework for how companies should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in their financial statements uncertain tax positions that they have taken or expect to take in a tax return. FIN No. 48 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2006 and is required to be adopted by the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2008. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of FIN No. 48, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial position. In May 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections, which replaces APB Opinion No. 20, Accounting Changes and SFAS No. 3, Reporting Accounting Changes in Interim Financial Statements-An Amendment of APB Opinion No. 28. SFAS No. 154 requires retrospective application to prior periods’ financial statements of a voluntary change in accounting principal unless it is not practicable. SFAS No. 154 is effective for accounting changes and corrections of errors made in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005 and is required to be adopted by the Company in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 154, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial position. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions): (1) See the “Explanatory Note” immediately preceding Part I, Item 1 and Note 2, “Restatement of Consolidated Financial Statements,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K. (a) DSO is based on ending net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period. (b) Days supply of inventory is based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each period. (c) DPO is based on ending accounts payable and most recent quarterly cost of sales adjusted for the change in inventory. As of September 30, 2006, the Company had $10.11 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, an increase of $1.85 billion over the same balances at the end of 2005. The principal components of this increase were cash generated by operating activities of $2.22 billion, proceeds of $318 million from the issuance of common stock under stock plans, and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation of $361 million, partially offset by cash used to purchase property, plant, and equipment of $657 million and repurchases of common stock of $355 million in conjunction with net-share settlements on vested restricted stock and restricted stock units. Cash generated from operating activities includes the impact of the $1.25 billion prepayment for NAND flash memory components. The Company’s short-term investment portfolio is primarily invested in high credit quality, liquid investments. As of September 30, 2006, approximately $4.1 billion of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures, stock repurchase activity, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Capital Expenditures The Company’s total capital expenditures were $657 million during 2006, consisting of $200 million for retail store facilities and equipment related to the Company’s Retail segment, $263 million for real estate acquisitions for the Company’s second corporate campus and for a new data center, and $194 million for corporate infrastructure, including information systems enhancements. The Company currently anticipates it will utilize approximately $675 million for capital expenditures during 2007, including approximately $360 million for expansion of the Company’s Retail segment, approximately $50 million for real estate acquisitions including the Company’s second corporate campus and its new data center, and approximately $265 million to support normal replacement of existing capital assets and enhancements to general information technology infrastructure. Stock Repurchase Plan In July 1999, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a plan for the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This repurchase plan does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. The Company has repurchased a total of 13.1 million shares at a cost of $217 million under this plan and was authorized to repurchase up to an additional $283 million of its common stock as of September 30, 2006. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 30, 2006 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Company’s balance sheet as current liabilities (in millions): Lease Commitments As of September 30, 2006, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of approximately $1.2 billion, $887 million of which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. Lease terms on the Company’s existing major facility operating leases range from 5 to 15 years. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. As of September 30, 2006, the Company had outstanding third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of approximately $2.3 billion. During 2006, the Company entered into long-term supply agreements with Hynix Semiconductor, Inc., Intel Corporation, Micron Technology, Inc., Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., and Toshiba Corporation to secure supply of NAND flash memory through calendar year 2010. As part of these agreements, the Company prepaid $1.25 billion for flash memory components during 2006. These prepayments will be applied to inventory purchases made over the life of each respective agreement. Asset Retirement Obligations The Company’s asset retirement obligations are associated with commitments to return property subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. As of September 30, 2006, the Company estimates that gross expected future cash flows of approximately $19 million will be required to fulfill these obligations. Other Obligations The Company’s other obligations of approximately $39 million are primarily related to Internet and telecommunications services. Indemnifications The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against itself or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a liability related to unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity or results of operations. Item 7A. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “predicts,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled “Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition” below. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company’s fiscal calendar. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law. Executive Overview The Company designs, manufactures, and markets personal computers and related software, services, peripherals, and networking solutions. The Company also designs, develops, and markets a line of portable digital music players along with related accessories and services including the online distribution of third-party music, audio books, music videos, short films, and television shows. The Company’s products and services include the Macintosh line of desktop and notebook computers, the iPod digital music player, the Xserve G5 server and Xserve RAID storage products, a portfolio of consumer and professional software applications, the Mac OS X operating system, the iTunes Music Store, a portfolio of peripherals that support and enhance the Macintosh and iPod product lines, and a variety of other service and support offerings. The Company sells its products worldwide through its online stores, its own retail stores, its direct sales force, and third-party wholesalers, resellers, and value added resellers. In addition, the Company sells a variety of third-party Macintosh compatible products, including computer printers and printing supplies, storage devices, computer memory, digital camcorders and still cameras, personal digital assistants, and various other computing products and supplies through its online and retail stores. The Company sells to education, consumer, creative professional, business, and government customers. A further description of the Company’s products may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this document under the heading “Business.” The Company’s business strategy leverages its ability, through the design and development of its own operating system, hardware, and many software applications and technologies, to bring to its customers around the world compelling new products and solutions with superior ease-of-use, seamless integration, and innovative industrial design. The Company participates in several highly competitive markets, including personal computers with its Macintosh line of computers, consumer electronics with its iPod line of digital music players, and distribution of third-party digital content through its online iTunes Music Store. While the Company is widely recognized as an innovator in the personal computer and consumer electronic markets as well as a leader in the emerging market for distribution of digital content, these are all highly competitive markets that are subject to aggressive pricing and increased competition. To remain competitive, the Company believes that increased investment in research and development (R&D) and marketing and advertising is necessary to maintain and extend its position in the markets where it competes. The Company’s R&D spending is focused on delivering timely updates and enhancements to its existing line of personal computers, displays, operating systems, software applications, and portable music players; developing new digital lifestyle consumer and professional software applications; and investing in new product areas such as rack-mount servers, RAID storage systems, and wireless technologies. The Company also believes investment in marketing and advertising programs is critical to increasing product and brand awareness. In June 2005, the Company announced its plan to begin using Intel microprocessors in its Macintosh computers. The Company plans to begin shipping certain models with Intel microprocessors by June 2006 and to complete the transition of all of its Macintosh computers to Intel microprocessors by the end of calendar year 2007. There are potential risks and uncertainties that may occur during this transition, which are further discussed under the heading “Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition.” The Company utilizes a variety of direct and indirect distribution channels. The Company believes that sales of its innovative and differentiated products are enhanced by knowledgeable salespersons who can convey the value of the hardware, software, and peripheral integration, demonstrate the unique digital lifestyle solutions that are available only on Macintosh computers, and demonstrate the compatibility of the Macintosh with the Windows platform and networks. The Company further believes that providing a high-quality sales and after-sales support experience is critical to attracting and retaining customers. To ensure a high-quality buying experience for its products in which service and education are emphasized, the Company has expanded and improved its distribution capabilities by opening its own retail stores in the U.S. and internationally. The Company had 124 stores open as of September 24, 2005. The Company also staffs selected third-party stores with the Company’s own employees to improve the buying experience through reseller channels. The Company has deployed Apple employees and contractors in reseller locations around the world including the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Australia. The Company also sells to customers directly through its online stores around the world. To improve access to the iPod product line, the Company has significantly expanded the number of distribution points where iPods are sold. The iPod product line can be purchased in certain department stores, member-only warehouse stores, large retail chains, and specialty retail stores, as well as through the channels listed above. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation and inventory purchase commitments, warranty costs, and income taxes. Management believes these policies to be critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit and Finance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of hardware, software, peripherals, digital content, and service and support contracts. The Company recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting standards, including Statement of Position (SOP) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as amended, and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 104, Revenue Recognition. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped, and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company’s product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the U.S., and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the Company legally retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed not to be, fixed or determinable, revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. The estimated cost of these programs is accrued as a reduction to revenue in the period the Company has sold the product and committed to the relevant program. The Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company’s historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions to revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company distributes its products through third-party resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and commercial customers. The Company generally does not require collateral from its customers. However, when possible the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in Latin America, Europe, and Asia and by arranging with third-party financing companies to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the Company’s direct customers. These credit-financing arrangements are directly between the third-party financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company generally does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements. However, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral, third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company’s distribution and retail channel partners. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management’s assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of the credit worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. The Company records an allowance to reduce the specific receivables to the amount that is reasonably believed to be collectible. The Company also records an allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors including historical experience with bad debts, the general economic environment, the financial condition of the Company’s distribution channels, and the aging of such receivables. If there is a deterioration of a major customer’s financial condition, if the Company becomes aware of additional information related to the credit worthiness of a major customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Company may have to adjust its allowance for doubtful accounts, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each fiscal quarter that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product life cycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The personal computer and consumer electronic industries are subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company’s products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs which would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the write-downs are recorded. The Company accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company’s requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company’s products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company’s products, the Company may be required to record additional reserves for cancellation fees that would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the cancellation fees are identified. Warranty Costs The Company provides currently for the estimated cost for product warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical and projected warranty claim rates, historical and projected cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company’s typical experience. Each quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities considering the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection, and adjusts the amounts as necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could negatively affect the Company’s results of operations. Income Taxes The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, the provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. The Company is currently evaluating the repatriation provisions of the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, which, if implemented by the Company, would affect the Company’s tax provision and deferred tax assets and liabilities. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Similarly, if the Company subsequently realizes deferred tax assets that were previously determined to be unrealizable, the respective valuation allowance would be reversed, resulting in a positive adjustment to earnings or a decrease in goodwill in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations and financial position. Net Sales Net sales and Macintosh unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product follow (net sales in millions and unit sales in thousands): Notes: (a) Other Segments include Asia Pacific and FileMaker. (b) Includes iMac, eMac, Mac mini, Power Mac and Xserve product lines. (c) Includes iBook and PowerBook product lines. (d) Consists of iTunes Music Store sales, iPod services, and Apple-branded and third-party iPod accessories. (e) Includes sales of Apple-branded and third-party displays, wireless connectivity and networking solutions, and other hardware accessories. (f) Includes sales of Apple-branded operating system, application software, third-party software, AppleCare, and Internet services. (g) Derived by dividing total Macintosh net sales by total Macintosh unit sales. (h) Derived by dividing total iPod net sales by total iPod unit sales. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 During 2005, net sales increased 68% or $5.7 billion from 2004. Several factors contributed favorably to net sales during 2005: · Net sales of iPods rose $3.2 billion or 248% during 2005 compared to 2004. Unit sales of iPods totaled 22.5 million in 2005, which represents an increase of 409% from the 4.4 million iPod units sold in 2004. Strong sales of iPods during 2005 continued to be experienced in all of the Company’s operating segments and was driven by strong demand for the iPod shuffle introduced in January 2005, the release of an updated version of the iPod mini in February 2005, the release of the iPod nano in September 2005, and expansion of the iPod’s distribution network. Net sales per iPod unit sold decreased 32% primarily due to the introduction of the lower priced iPod shuffle in January 2005 and iPod mini pricing reductions in February 2005. From the introduction of the iPod in 2002 through 2005, the Company has sold approximately 28 million iPods. · Other music related products and services consists of sales associated with the iTunes Music Store and iPod services and accessories. Net sales of other music related products and services increased $621 million or 223% during 2005 compared to 2004. The Company has experienced strong growth in sales of iPod services and accessories consistent with the increase in overall iPod unit sales for 2005. The increased sales from the iTunes Music Store is primarily due to substantial growth of net sales in the U.S. and expansion in Europe, Canada, and Japan. · Total Macintosh net sales increased $1.4 billion or 27% during 2005 compared to 2004. Unit sales of Macintosh systems increased 1.2 million units or 38% during 2005 compared to 2004. The increases in Macintosh net sales and unit sales relate primarily to strong demand for the Company’s desktop products, which was experienced in all of the Company’s operating segments. The Company believes that the success of the iPod is having a positive impact on Macintosh net sales by introducing new customers to the Company’s other products. Desktop demand was stimulated in 2005 due to the new iMac G5 and the introduction of the Mac mini in January 2005. Net sales and unit sales of desktop products increased 45% and 55%, respectively, during 2005 compared to 2004. Macintosh net sales and unit sales also include sales of the Company’s portable products, which increased 11% and 21%, respectively, compared to 2004. Net sales per Macintosh unit sold decreased 7% on a year-over-year basis. The decrease was the result of changes in the overall unit mix towards relatively lower-priced consumer products, specifically the impact of the Mac mini product, and desktop and portable price reductions. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in the proportion of direct sales. · The Retail segment’s net sales grew 98% to $2.4 billion during 2005 compared to 2004. This increase is largely attributable to the increase in total stores from 86 at the end of 2004 to 124 at the end of 2005, as well as 44% year-over-year increase in average revenue per store. While the Company’s customers in areas where the Retail segment has opened stores may elect to purchase from the Retail segment stores rather than the Company’s preexisting sales channels in the U.S., Canada, Japan, and the U.K., the Company believes that a substantial portion of the Retail segment’s net sales is incremental to the Company’s total net sales. See additional comments below related to the Retail segment under the heading “Segment Operating Performance.” · Net sales of peripherals and other hardware rose by 18% during 2005 compared to 2004 primarily due to an increase in net sales of displays and other computer accessories. Net sales of other hardware include AirPort cards and base stations, Xserve RAID storage, iSight digital video cameras, and third-party hardware products. · The Company’s U.S. education channel experienced year-over-year growth in both net sales and unit sales of approximately 21% for 2005. The increase in U.S. education net sales for 2005 relates primarily to a 32% year-over-year increase in higher education net sales due to increased iMac shipments, portable system shipments, and online sales. The Company also experienced 11% growth in K-12 net sales due to increased iBook sales and education 1:1 sales. While net sales to the K-12 market were slightly higher during 2005 than 2004, the Company believes this market continues to be subject to budget constraints and competitive pressures. · Net sales of software, service and other sales rose $270 million or 33% during 2005 compared to 2004. This growth was primarily attributable to increased net sales in AppleCare Protection Plan (APP) extended service and support contracts, driven primarily by higher associated Macintosh computer sales. Additionally, the Company experienced increases in net sales of .Mac Internet service, professional and consumer applications, third-party software, and Mac OS X that was primarily attributable to the release of version 10.4 Tiger in April 2005. Fiscal Year 2004 versus 2003 During 2004, net sales increased 33% or $2.1 billion from 2003. Several factors contributed favorably to net sales during 2004: · Net sales of Macintosh systems increased $432 million or 10% during 2004 compared to 2003 while net sales per Macintosh unit sold remained relatively flat on a year-over-year basis. Unit sales of Macintosh systems increased 278,000 units or 9% during 2004 compared to 2003. These increases in net sales and unit sales were a result of strong demand for all of the Company’s Macintosh systems, except the iMac. The Company’s portable systems, consisting of the PowerBook and iBook, produced the strongest revenue and unit growth during 2004 compared to 2003 of approximately 26% and 33%, respectively. Unit sales of portable systems accounted for 51% of all Macintosh systems sold during 2004 compared to only 42% during 2003. The Company believes that these results reflected an overall trend in the industry towards portable systems. Performance of the Company’s Power Macintosh systems also yielded positive results in 2004 over 2003, including a 15% and 6% increase in net sales and unit sales, respectively. The increase in Power Macintosh sales in 2004 was due primarily to the introduction of the Power Mac G5, which began shipping at the end of 2003. Although Power Macintosh sales increased from 2003, sales of this product were constrained in the second half of 2004 as a result of manufacturing problems at IBM, the Company’s sole supplier of the PowerPC G5 processor. · Net sales of iPods rose $961 million or 279% during 2004 compared to 2003. Unit sales of iPods totaled 4.4 million in 2004, which represents an increase of 370% from the 939,000 iPod units sold in 2003. Strong demand for the iPods during 2004 were experienced in all of the Company’s operating segments and was driven by enhancements to the iPod, the introduction of the iPod mini, increased expansion of the Company’s iPod distribution network, and continued success of the iTunes Music Store due largely to making it available to both Macintosh and Windows users in the U.S., U.K., France, and Germany. · The Retail segment’s net sales grew 91% to $1.2 billion during 2004 compared to 2003. This increase was largely attributable to the increase in total stores from 65 at the end of 2003 to 86 at the end of 2004, as well as a 36% year-over-year increase in average revenue per store. While the Company’s customers in areas where the Retail segment has opened stores may have elected to purchase from the Retail segment stores rather than the Company’s preexisting sales channels in the U.S. and Japan, the Company believes that a substantial portion of the Retail segment’s net sales is incremental to the Company’s total net sales. See additional comments below related to the Retail segment under the heading “Segment Operating Performance.” · Net sales of peripherals and other hardware rose by 38% during 2004 compared to 2003 primarily due to an increase in net sales of displays and other computer accessories. Net sales of other computer accessories include AirPort cards and base stations, iSight digital video cameras, and third-party hardware products. The increase in total net sales of peripherals and other hardware was related to the overall increase in Macintosh unit sales and the introduction of new and updated peripheral products and was experienced predominantly by the Company’s Americas, Europe, and Retail segments. · Net sales of other music related products and services increased $242 million or 672% during 2004 compared to 2003. The Company experienced strong growth in sales of iPod services and accessories consistent with the increase in overall iPod unit sales for 2004. The increased sales from the iTunes Music Store, which was originally introduced in April 2003, was primarily due to making the service available for Windows in October 2003 and the introduction of the service in the U.K., France, and Germany in June 2004. · Net sales of software rose $140 million or 39% during 2004 compared to 2003 due primarily to higher net sales of the Company’s Apple-branded software and in particular, higher net sales of the Company’s operating system software, including Mac OS X version 10.3 “Panther,” which was released in October 2003. Net sales of Panther accounted for approximately $74 million or over 50% of the increase in software net sales for 2004 compared to 2003. · The Company’s U.S. education channel experienced year-over-year growth in net sales of approximately 19% for 2004 compared to 2003. Unit sales also increased by 10% during 2004 compared to 2003. The increase in U.S. education net sales for 2004 related primarily to a 40% year-over-year increase in higher education net sales and to a lesser extent the Company’s 3% growth in K-12 net sales. · Service and other sales increased $37 million or 13% during 2004 compared to 2003. These increases were the result of significant year-over-year increases in net sales associated with APP extended maintenance and support services, as well as increased net sales associated with the Company’s .Mac Internet service. Increased net sales associated with APP were primarily the result of higher Macintosh unit sales and higher attach rates on APP over the last several years. Offsetting the favorable factors discussed above, the Company’s net sales during 2004 were negatively impacted by the following: · Net sales and unit sales of iMac systems were down 23% and 16%, respectively, during 2004 versus 2003. The decrease in iMac net sales and unit sales was largely due to the delay in the introduction of the new iMac, based on the PowerPC G5 processor, primarily as a result of manufacturing problems experienced by IBM. The delays in the new iMac resulted in the depletion of inventory of the old iMac flat panel prior to availability of the new iMac G5. The old flat panel iMac form factor, which was available during most of 2004, was nearly 3 years old by the time the new iMac G5 began shipping in September 2004 and had experienced declines in sales as a result of the age of this product. The Company believes that sales of iMac systems have also declined due to a shift in consumer preference to portable systems and desktop models from competitors with price points below $1,000. · Net sales and unit sales in the Company’s Japan segment decreased 3% and 14%, respectively, during 2004 versus 2003. The Company believes these declines related to a shift in sales from the Japan segment to the Retail segment as a result of the Tokyo and Osaka store openings in 2004. Declines in net sales in Japan may have also related to delays in computer upgrades by certain professional and creative customers pending release in Japan of certain Mac OS X native applications, such as Quark Xpress 6, which did not become available until September 2004. When sales from the Japan retail stores are included in the results for the Japan segment, the combined revenue in Japan resulted in a 3% year-over-year increase in 2004 as compared to 2003. See additional comments below related to the Japan segment under the heading “Segment Operating Performance.” Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company’s reportable operating segments are comprised of the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The Americas, Europe, and Japan reportable segments do not include activities related to the Retail segment. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Retail segment operated Apple-owned retail stores in the U.S., Canada, Japan, and the U.K. during 2005. Each reportable geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company’s operating segments may be found in Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 11, “Segment Information and Geographic Data.” Americas During 2005, net sales in the Americas segment grew 64% or $2.6 billion compared to 2004. The increase in net sales during 2005 was primarily attributable to the significant year-over-year increase in iPod sales, sales of other music related products and services, and strong sales of desktop and portable Macintosh systems. This increase was partially offset by a shift in sales to the Retail segment, which had 117 stores in the U.S. and Canada as of the end of 2005. Macintosh unit sales also increased by 30% in 2005 compared to 2004, driven primarily by strong sales of desktop systems largely attributable to strong sales from the new iMac, which began shipping in September 2004, and the Mac mini, which was introduced in January 2005. During 2005 and 2004, the Americas segment represented approximately 47% and 49%, respectively, of the Company’s total net sales and represented approximately 48% and 51%, respectively, of total Macintosh unit sales. As noted above, the Company experienced an increase in both U.S. education channel net sales and unit sales of 21% for 2005 compared to 2004. Strength in higher education sales related primarily to strong iMac shipments, portable system shipments, and online sales. This strength drove year-over-year growth in net sales of 32% for the higher education channel during 2005. Despite challenges in the K-12 market from continued budget constraints and competitive pressures, the Company’s K-12 net sales grew year-over-year by 11% during 2005 due to increased iBook sales and 1:1 education sales. During 2004, net sales in the Americas segment grew 26% or $838 million compared to 2003. The increase in net sales during 2004 was primarily attributable to the significant year-over-year increase in iPod sales as well as strong sales of peripherals, software, and services. This increase was partially offset by a shift in sales to the Retail segment, which had 84 stores in the U.S. as of the end of 2004. Macintosh unit sales also increased by 4% in 2004 compared to 2003, driven primarily by strong sales of portable and Power Macintosh systems, partially offset by weakness in iMac sales. During 2004 and 2003, the Americas segment represented approximately 49% and 51%, respectively, of the Company’s total net sales and represented approximately 51% and 54%, respectively, of total Macintosh unit sales. The Company experienced an increase in U.S. education channel net sales of 19% for 2004 compared to 2003. Strong U.S. education net sales for 2004 related primarily to strength in higher education net sales that resulted from a successful back-to-school selling season with strong demand for the Company’s portables. This strength drove year-over-year growth in net sales of 40% for the higher education channel during 2004. The Company’s K-12 net sales grew year-over-year by 3% during 2004, despite the challenges in the K-12 market from continued budget constraints and increased competition. Europe During 2005, net sales in the Europe segment grew $1.3 billion or 71% from 2004. Total Macintosh unit sales in Europe also experienced growth during the current year by increasing 47% in 2005 compared to 2004. Consistent with the Americas segment, Europe experienced strong net sales of desktop products, iPod, other music related products and services, and software and service sales. Demand in Europe during 2005 was particularly strong for the Company’s desktop computers, which experienced a year-over-year increase of 56%. Similar to the results of the Company’s other segments, net sales of iPods, peripherals and software were strong in 2005. Net sales in Europe rebounded in 2004 increasing $490 million or 37% from 2003. Total Macintosh unit sales in Europe also experienced growth in 2004 by increasing 13% compared to 2003. Consistent with the Americas segment, Europe experienced strong net sales across all product lines, except the iMac systems. Demand in Europe during 2004 was particularly strong for the Company’s Power Macintosh systems and portable Macintosh systems, which experienced year-over-year increases of 29% and 42%, respectively. Similar to the results of the Company’s other segments, net sales of iPods, peripherals and software were strong in 2004 over 2003. Japan Japan’s net sales and Macintosh unit sales were up 36% and 8%, respectively, during 2005 compared to 2004. Japan experienced increased net sales in desktop products, iPod, and other music related products and services. Desktop net sales and unit sales increased by 31% and 41%, respectively, and iPod sales increased by 220% during 2005 compared to 2004. The overall increase in net sales was partially offset by a decline in portable system net sales during 2005 compared to 2004, which the Company believes might be attributable to a shift in sales from portables to the new iMac G5 and Mac mini, and a shift to the Retail segment as a result of opening two additional stores in Japan during 2005. Japan’s net sales and Macintosh unit sales were down 3% and 14%, respectively, during 2004 compared to 2003, which lagged behind all of the Company’s other operating segments. These decreases in net sales and unit sales were believed to be attributable in part to a shift in sales from the Japan segment to the Retail segment as a result of the opening of two stores in Japan in 2004. In addition, such decreases may have been related to delayed computer system upgrades by some professional and creative customers who were awaiting the release of Quark XPress 6 for Mac OS X, which did not occur until September 2004. The decrease in net sales was partially offset by strong iPod and iBook sales during 2004 compared to 2003. Retail The Company opened 38 new retail stores during 2005, including 6 international stores in the U.K, Japan, and Canada, bringing the total number of open stores to 124 as of September 24, 2005. This compares to 86 open stores as of September 25, 2004 and 65 open stores as of September 27, 2003. Net sales of the Retail segment grew to $2.4 billion during 2005 from $1.2 billion and $621 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. The increases in net sales during both 2005 and 2004 reflect the impact of new store openings for each year, including the opening of 38 new stores in 2005 and 21 new stores in 2004. An increase in average revenue per store also contributed to the segment’s strong sales in 2005. With an average of 105 stores open during 2005, the Retail segment achieved annualized revenue per store of approximately $22.4 million, as compared to $15.6 million in 2004 with a 76 store average, and $11.5 million in 2003 with a 54 store average. As measured by the Company’s operating segment reporting, the Retail segment reported operating income of $151 million during 2005 as compared to operating income of $39 million during 2004 and an operating loss of $5 million during 2003. This improvement is primarily attributable to the segment’s year-over-year increase in average revenue per store, the impact of opening new stores, and the segment’s year-over-year increase in net sales, which resulted in higher leverage on occupancy, depreciation, and other fixed costs. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital expenditures associated with the Retail segment were $132 million in 2005, bringing the total capital expenditures since inception of the Retail segment to approximately $529 million. As of September 24, 2005, the Retail segment had approximately 3,673 employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with retail store space and related facilities of approximately $606 million. The Company would incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate its Retail segment or close individual stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations and financial condition. Gross Margin Gross margin for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): Gross margin increased in 2005 to 29.0% of net sales from 27.3% of net sales in 2004. The Company’s gross margin during 2005 increased due to more favorable pricing on certain commodity components including LCD flat-panel displays and DRAM memory; an increase in higher margin software sales; a favorable shift in direct sales related primarily to the Company’s Retail and online stores; and higher overall revenue that provided for more leverage on fixed production costs. These increases to gross margin were partially offset by an increase in lower margin iPod sales. The Company anticipates that its gross margin and the gross margin of the overall personal computer and consumer electronics industries will remain under pressure in light of price competition, especially for the iPod product line. The Company expects gross margin percentage to decline in the first quarter of 2006 primarily as a result of a shift in the mix of revenue toward lower margin products such as the iPod and content from the iTunes Music Store. The foregoing statements regarding the Company’s expected gross margin are forward-looking. There can be no assurance that current gross margins will be maintained or targeted gross margin levels will be achieved. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products, including iPods, will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services, and potential changes to the Company’s product mix, including higher unit sales of consumer products with lower average selling prices and lower gross margins. In response to these downward pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company’s ability to effectively manage product quality and warranty costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Due to the Company’s significant international operations, financial results can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. The Company orders components for its products and builds inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company’s markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third-parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products or components. The Company’s operating results and financial condition in the past have been and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company’s ability to manage its inventory levels and outstanding purchase commitments and to respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. Gross margin declined in 2004 to 27.3% of net sales from 27.5% of net sales in 2003. The Company’s gross margin during 2004 declined due to an increase in mix towards lower margin iPod and iBook sales, pricing actions on certain Power Macintosh G5 models that were transitioned during the beginning of 2004, higher warranty costs on certain portable Macintosh products, and higher freight and duty costs during 2004. These unfavorable factors were partially offset by an increase in direct sales and a 39% year-over-year increase in higher margin software sales. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development (R&D) The Company recognizes that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company’s core business strategy. The Company has historically relied upon innovation to remain competitive. R&D expense amounted to approximately 4% of total net sales during 2005 down from 6% and 8% of total net sales in 2004 and 2003, respectively. This decrease is due to the significant increase of 68% in total net sales of the Company for 2005. Although R&D expense decreased as a percentage of total net sales in 2005, actual expense for R&D in 2005 increased $45 million or 9% from 2004, which follows an $18 million or 4% increase in 2004 compared to 2003. The overall increase in R&D expense relates primarily to increased headcount and support for new product development activities and the impact of employee salary increases in 2005. R&D expense does not include capitalized software development costs of approximately $29.7 million related to the development of Mac OS X Tiger during 2005; $4.5 million related to the development of Mac OS X Tiger and $2.3 million related to the development of FileMaker Pro 7 in 2004; and $14.7 million related to the development of Mac OS X Panther in 2003. Further information related to the Company’s capitalization of software development costs may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Selling, General, and Administrative Expense (SG&A) Expenditures for SG&A increased $438 million or 31% during 2005 compared to 2004. These increases are due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, a current year increase in discretionary spending on marketing and advertising, and higher direct and channel selling expenses resulting from the increase in net sales and employee salary merit increases. SG&A as a percentage of total net sales in 2005 was 13%, down from 17% in 2004, which is due to the increase in total net sales of 68% for the Company during 2005. Expenditures for SG&A increased $209 million or 17% during 2004 compared to 2003. These increases were due primarily to the Company’s continued expansion of its Retail segment in both domestic and international markets, an increase in discretionary spending on marketing and advertising, an increase in amortization costs associated with restricted stock compensation, and higher direct and channel selling expenses resulting from the increase in net sales and employee salary merit increases. SG&A as a percentage of total net sales in 2004 was 17%, down from 20% in 2003 due to the increase in total net sales for the Company of 33% during 2004. Fiscal 2004 Restructuring Actions The Company recorded total restructuring charges of approximately $23 million during 2004, including approximately $14 million in severance costs, $5.5 million in asset impairments, and a $3.5 million charge for lease cancellations in conjunction with the vacating of a leased sales facility in Europe during the fourth quarter of 2004 related to a European workforce reduction. Of the $23 million charge, $19.7 million had been utilized by the end of 2005, with the remaining $3.3 million consisting of $0.7 million for employee severance benefits and $2.6 million for lease cancellations. These actions will result in the termination of 461 employees, 448 of which had been terminated prior to the end of 2005. Fiscal 2003 Restructuring Actions The Company recorded total restructuring charges of approximately $26.8 million during 2003, including approximately $7.4 million in severance costs, a $5.0 million charge to write-off deferred compensation, $7.1 million in asset impairments, and a $7.3 million charge for lease cancellations primarily related to the closure of the Company’s Singapore manufacturing operations during the first quarter of 2003. Of the $26.8 million charge, all had been utilized by the end of 2005, except for approximately $1.7 million related to operating lease costs on abandoned facilities. These actions resulted in the termination of 353 employees. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for each of the last three fiscal years are as follows (in millions): Gains and Losses on Non-current Investments The Company previously held significant investments in ARM Holdings plc (ARM), Akamai Technologies, Inc. (Akamai), and EarthLink Network, Inc. (EarthLink). The Company sold all of the remaining holdings in these non-current investments in 2004 and 2003. Pretax gains recorded upon the sale of these non-current investments were $4 million and $10 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. Interest and Other Income, Net Total interest and other income, net increased $112 million or 211% to $165 million during 2005 compared to $53 million in 2004 and $83 million in 2003. These increases are attributable primarily to increasing investment yields on the Company’s cash and short-term investments and higher invested balances. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased to 2.70% in 2005 compared to the 1.38% and 1.89% rates earned during 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Company occasionally sells short-term investments prior to their stated maturities. As a result of such sales, the Company recognized net losses of $137,000 in 2005 and net gains of $1 million and $21 million during 2004 and 2003, respectively. Partially offsetting the increase in other income were higher foreign currency hedging expenses. Interest expense consisted primarily of interest on the Company’s $300 million aggregate principal amount unsecured notes, which were repaid upon their maturity in February 2004. The unsecured notes were sold at 99.925% of par for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. Total deferred gain resulting from the closure of debt swaps of approximately $23 million was fully amortized as of the notes’ maturity in February 2004. Provision for Income Taxes The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended September 24, 2005 was approximately 26%. The Company’s effective rate differs from the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% due primarily to certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes are provided because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S., research and development tax credits, and a reduction of certain tax contingency reserves and adjustments to net deferred tax assets. The benefit from adjustments to tax contingency reserves and net deferred tax assets was $67 million. In addition, the Company recorded a $25 million reduction of the valuation allowance associated with deferred tax assets that, in management’s opinion, are now more likely than not to be realized in the future. $14 million of the valuation allowance reduction was recorded as a credit to income tax expense, and the remainder was recorded as a credit to goodwill. As of September 24, 2005, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $767 million before being offset against certain deferred tax liabilities and a valuation allowance for presentation on the Company’s balance sheet. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining net deferred tax assets. As of September 24, 2005 and September 25, 2004, a valuation allowance of $5 million and $30 million, respectively, was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of tax loss carryforwards that may not be realized. The remaining valuation allowance at September 24, 2005 relates principally to certain state operating loss carryforwards. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has completed its field audit of the Company’s federal income tax returns for all years prior to 2002 and proposed certain adjustments. Certain of these adjustments are being contested through the IRS Appeals Office. Substantially all IRS audit issues for these years have been resolved. In addition, the Company is also subject to audits by state, local, and foreign tax authorities. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. Should any issues addressed in the Company’s tax audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with management’s expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution occurs. On October 22, 2004, the American Jobs Creation Act (AJCA) was signed into law. The AJCA includes a provision for the deduction of 85% of certain foreign earnings that are repatriated, as defined in the AJCA. The legislation provided the Company with the option to apply this provision to repatriations of qualifying earnings in either 2005 or 2006. The Company is continuing to evaluate the effects of the repatriation provision and expects to complete the evaluation in 2006. A maximum of $755 million may be eligible for repatriation under the reduced tax rate provided by AJCA. However, given the uncertainties and complexities of the repatriation provision and the Company’s continuing evaluation, the Company has not yet determined the amount that may be repatriated or the related potential income tax effects of such repatriation. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In November 2005, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position (FSP) Nos. FAS 115-1 and FAS 124-1, The Meaning of Other-Than-Temporary Impairment and its Application to Certain Investments. FSP Nos. FAS 115-1 and FAS 124-1 amend SFAS No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities, SFAS No. 124, Accounting for Certain Investments Held by Not-for-Profit Organizations, as well as APB Opinion No. 18, The Equity Method of Accounting for Investments in Common Stock. This guidance nullifies certain requirements of EITF 03-1, The Meaning of Other-Than-Temporary Impairment and its Application to Certain Investments. FSP Nos. FAS 115-1 and FAS 124-1 include guidance for evaluating and recording impairment losses on debt and equity investments, as well as new disclosure requirements for investments that are deemed to be temporarily impaired. FSP Nos. FAS 115-1 and FAS 124-1 also require other-than-temporary impaired debt securities to be written down to its impaired value, which becomes the new cost basis. FSP Nos. FAS 115-1 and FAS 124-1 are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of FSP Nos. FAS 115-1 and FAS 124-1, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial position. In November 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 151, Inventory Costs, which amends the guidance in Accounting Research Bulletin (ARB) No. 43, Chapter 4, Inventory Pricing, to clarify the accounting for abnormal amounts of facility expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted material (spoilage). ARB 43, Chapter 4, previously stated that “under some circumstances, items such as idle facility expense, excessive spoilage, double freight, and rehandling costs may be so abnormal as to require treatment as current period charges.” SFAS 151 requires that those items be recognized as current-period charges regardless of whether they meet the criterion of “so abnormal.” In addition, SFAS 151 requires that allocation of fixed production overhead to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of the production facilities. SFAS 151 is effective for fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS 151, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial position. In December 2004, the FASB issued FSP 109-2, Accounting and Disclosure Guidance for the Foreign Earnings Repatriation Provision within the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. FSP 109-2 provides additional time to companies beyond the financial reporting period of enactment to evaluate the effects of the AJCA on their plans for repatriation of foreign earnings for purposes of applying SFAS 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. The Company is currently evaluating the repatriation provisions of AJCA, which if implemented by the Company would affect the Company’s tax provision and deferred tax assets and liabilities. However, given the uncertainties and complexities of the repatriation provision and the Company’s continuing evaluation, it is not possible at this time to determine the amount, if any, that will be repatriated or the related potential income tax effects of such repatriation. The Company expects to complete the evaluation in 2006. In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004) (SFAS No. 123R), Share-Based Payment, that addresses the accounting for share-based payment transactions in which an enterprise receives employee services in exchange for (a) equity instruments of the enterprise or (b) liabilities that are based on the fair value of the enterprise’s equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of such equity instruments. SFAS No. 123R eliminates the ability to account for share-based compensation transactions using the intrinsic value method under Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, and instead requires such transactions be accounted for using a fair-value-based method. The Company will recognize stock-based compensation expense on all awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period using the modified prospective method. In January 2005, the SEC issued SAB No. 107, which provides supplemental implementation guidance for SFAS No. 123R. SFAS No. 123R will be effective for the Company beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2006. The Company expects the adoption of SFAS No. 123R will result in a reduction of diluted earnings per common share of approximately $0.03 for the first quarter of fiscal 2006. In March 2005, the FASB issued Interpretation No. (FIN) 47, Accounting for Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations, to clarify the requirement to record liabilities stemming from a legal obligation to perform an asset retirement activity in which the timing or method of settlement is conditional on a future event. The Company plans to adopt FIN 47 in the first quarter of fiscal 2006, and does not expect the application of FIN 47 to have a material impact on its results of operations, cash flows or financial position. In May 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections which replaces APB Opinion No. 20 Accounting Changes and SFAS No. 3, Reporting Accounting Changes in Interim Financial Statements-An Amendment of APB Opinion No. 28. SFAS No. 154 requires retrospective application to prior periods’ financial statements of a voluntary change in accounting principal unless it is not practicable. SFAS No. 154 is effective for accounting changes and corrections of errors made in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005 and is required to be adopted by the Company in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. Although the Company will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS No. 154, management does not currently believe adoption will have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations or financial position. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions): (a) DSO is based on ending net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period. (b) Days supply of inventory is based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each period. (c) DPO is based on ending accounts payable and most recent quarterly cost of sales adjusted for the change in inventory. As of September 24, 2005, the Company had $8.261 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, an increase of $2.797 billion over the same balances at the end of 2004. The principal components of this increase were ­cash generated by operating activities of $2.535 billion and proceeds of $543 million from the issuance of common stock under stock plans, partially offset by cash used to purchase property, plant, and equipment of $260 million. The Company’s short-term investment portfolio is primarily invested in high credit quality, liquid investments. As of September 24, 2005, approximately $4.3 billion of the Company’s cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries are generally subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the U.S. The Company is currently assessing the impact of the one-time favorable foreign dividend provisions recently enacted as part of the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, and may decide to repatriate earnings from some of its foreign subsidiaries. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures, stock repurchase activity, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Capital Expenditures The Company’s total capital expenditures were $260 million during 2005, $132 million of which were for retail store facilities and equipment related to the Company’s Retail segment and $128 million of which were primarily for corporate infrastructure, including information systems enhancements and operating facilities enhancements and expansions. The Company currently anticipates it will utilize approximately $390 million for capital expenditures during 2006, approximately $210 million of which is expected to be utilized for further expansion of the Company’s Retail segment and the remainder utilized to support normal replacement of existing capital assets and enhancements to general information technology infrastructure. Stock Repurchase Plan In July 1999, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a plan for the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This repurchase plan does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. Since inception of the stock repurchase plan, the Company had repurchased a total of 13.1 million shares at a cost of $217 million. The Company has not engaged in any transactions to repurchase its common stock during 2005 or 2004. The Company was authorized to repurchase up to an additional $283 million of its common stock as of September 24, 2005. On February 28, 2005, the Company effected a two-for-one stock split to shareholders of record as of February 18, 2005. All share and per share information has been retroactively adjusted to reflect the stock split. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments, or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk, or credit risk support to the Company. The following table presents certain payments due by the Company under contractual obligations with minimum firm commitments as of September 24, 2005 and excludes amounts already recorded on the Company’s balance sheet as current liabilities (in millions): Lease Commitments As of September 24, 2005, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of approximately $865 million, $606 million of which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. Lease terms on the Company’s existing major facility operating leases range from 5 to 20 years. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company’s products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. As of September 24, 2005, the Company had outstanding third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of approximately $2.0 billion. Subsequent to September 24, 2005, the Company entered into long-term supply agreements with Hynix Semiconductor, Inc., Intel Corporation, Micron Technology, Inc., Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., and Toshiba Corporation to secure supply of NAND flash memory through calendar year 2010. As part of these agreements, the Company intends to prepay a total of $1.25 billion for flash memory components by the end of the second quarter of 2006. Asset Retirement Obligations The Company’s asset retirement obligations are associated with commitments to return property subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. As of September 24, 2005, the Company estimates that gross expected future cash flows of approximately $14 million will be required to fulfill these obligations. Other Obligations The Company’s other obligations of approximately $4 million are primarily related to Internet and telecommunications services. Indemnifications The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property rights. Other agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted against itself or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a liability related to unresolved infringement claims subject to indemnification that would have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity or results of operations. Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition Because of the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company’s operating results and financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. General economic conditions and current economic and political uncertainty could adversely affect the demand for the Company’s products and the financial health of its suppliers, distributors, and resellers. The Company’s operating performance depends significantly on general economic conditions in the U.S. and abroad. At times in the past, demand for the Company’s products has been negatively impacted by difficult global economic conditions. Additionally, some of the Company’s education customers appeared to be delaying technology purchases due to concerns about the overall impact of the weaker economy and state budget deficits on their available funding. Although recent macroeconomic trends seem to indicate an economic recovery, continued uncertainty about future economic conditions makes it difficult to forecast future demand for the Company’s products and related operating results. Should global and/or regional economic conditions deteriorate, demand for the Company’s products could be adversely affected, as could the financial health of its suppliers, distributors, and resellers. War, terrorism, public health issues or other business interruptions could disrupt supply, delivery or demand of products, which could negatively affect the Company’s operations and performance. War, terrorism, public health issues and other business interruptions whether in the U.S. or abroad, have caused and could cause damage or disruption to international commerce by creating economic and political uncertainties that may have a strong negative impact on the global economy, the Company, and the Company’s suppliers or customers. The Company’s major business operations are subject to interruption by earthquake, other natural disasters, fire, power shortages, terrorist attacks and other hostile acts, labor disputes, public health issues, and other events beyond its control. The majority of the Company’s research and development activities, its corporate headquarters, information technology systems, and other critical business operations, including certain component suppliers and manufacturing vendors, are located near major seismic faults. Because the Company does not carry earthquake insurance for direct quake-related losses, the Company’s operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected in the event of a major earthquake or other natural or manmade disaster. Although it is impossible to predict the occurrences or consequences of any such events, such events could result in a decrease in demand for the Company’s products, make it difficult or impossible for the Company to deliver products to its customers or to receive components from its suppliers, and could create delays and inefficiencies in the Company’s supply chain. In addition, should major public health issues, including pandemics, arise, the Company could be negatively impacted by the need for more stringent employee travel restrictions, additional limitations in the availability of freight services, governmental actions limiting the movement of products between various regions, delays in production ramps of new products, and disruptions in the operations of the Company’s manufacturing vendors and component suppliers. The Company’s operating results and financial condition have been, and in the future may be, adversely affected by these events. The market for personal computers and related peripherals and services, as well as digital music devices and related services, is highly competitive. If the Company is unable to effectively compete in these markets, its results of operations could be adversely affected. The personal computer industry is highly competitive and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual improvement in product price/performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by competitors, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a large number of competitors. Over the past several years, price competition in the market for personal computers and related peripherals has been particularly intense as competitors who sell Windows and Linux based personal computers have aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins for personal computing products. The Company’s results of operations and financial condition have been, and in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by these and other industry-wide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross margins. The personal computer industry has also been characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality, hardware performance, and features based on existing or emerging industry standards. Further, as the personal computer industry and its customers place more reliance on the Internet, an increasing number of Internet devices that are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers may compete for market share with the Company’s existing products. Several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target certain of the Company’s key market segments, including consumer, education, professional and consumer digital video editing, and design and publishing. Several of the Company’s competitors have introduced or announced plans to introduce digital music products and/or online stores offering digital music distribution that mimic many of the unique design, technical features, and solutions of the Company’s products. The Company has a significant number of competitors, many of whom have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources, as well as broader product lines and larger installed customer bases than those of the Company. Additionally, there has been a trend towards consolidation in the personal computer industry that has resulted in larger and potentially stronger competitors in the Company’s markets. The Company is currently the only maker of hardware using the Mac OS. The Mac OS has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers utilizing other competing operating systems, including Windows and Linux. The Company’s future operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on its ability to continue to develop improvements to the Macintosh platform in order to maintain perceived design and functional advantages over competing platforms. Additionally, if unauthorized copies of the Mac OS are used on other companies’ hardware products and result in decreased demand for the Company’s hardware products, the Company’s results of operations may be adversely affected. The Company is currently focused on market opportunities related to digital music distribution and related consumer electronic devices, including iPods. The Company faces increasing competition from other companies promoting their own digital music products, including music enabled cell phones, distribution services, and free peer-to-peer music services. These competitors include both new entrants with different market approaches, such as subscription services models, and also larger companies that may have greater technical, marketing, distribution, and other resources than those of the Company, as well as established hardware, software, and digital content supplier relationships. Failure to effectively compete could negatively affect the Company’s operating results and financial position. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to continue to provide products and services that effectively compete in these markets or successfully distribute and sell digital music outside the U.S. The Company may also have to respond to price competition by lowering prices and/or increasing features which could adversely affect the Company’s music product gross margins as well as overall Company gross margins. The Company also faces increased competition in the U.S. education market. U.S. elementary and secondary schools, as well as college and university customers, remain a core market for the Company. Uncertainty in this channel remains as several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target the education market for personal computers, which could negatively affect the Company’s market share. In an effort to regain market share and remain competitive, the Company has been and will continue to pursue one-to-one (1:1) learning solutions in education. 1:1 learning solutions typically consist of iBook portable systems for every student and teacher along with a wireless network connected to a central server. These 1:1 learning solutions and other strategic sales are generally priced more aggressively and could result in significantly less profitability or even in financial losses, particularly for larger deals. Although the Company believes it has taken certain steps to strengthen its position in the education market, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to increase or maintain its share of the education market or execute profitably on large strategic arrangements. Failure to do so may have an adverse impact on the Company’s operating results and financial condition. The Company’s transition from PowerPC microprocessors used by Macintosh computers to microprocessors built by Intel is subject to numerous risks. In June 2005, the Company announced its intention to transition from the use of PowerPC microprocessors to the use of Intel microprocessors in all of its Macintosh computers by the end of calendar year 2007. This transition is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including the Company’s ability to timely develop and deliver new products using Intel microprocessors, the timely innovation and delivery of related hardware and software products, including the Company’s applications, to support Intel microprocessors, market acceptance of Intel-based Macintosh computers, the development and availability on acceptable terms of components and services essential to enable the Company to timely deliver Intel-based Macintosh computers, and the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand for both PowerPC and Intel-based Macintosh computers. In addition, the Company is dependent on third-party software developers such as Microsoft and Adobe continuing to support current applications that run on PowerPC-based computers and timely developing versions of current and future applications that run on Intel and PowerPC-based Macintosh computers. The Company’s inability to timely deliver new Intel-based products or obtain developer commitment both to continue supporting applications that run on PowerPC microprocessors and timely transition their applications to run natively on Intel-based products may have an adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations. The Company’s announcement of its intention to transition to Intel microprocessors may negatively impact sales of current and future Macintosh products containing PowerPC microprocessors, as customers may elect to delay purchases until the Intel-based products are available. Additionally, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to maintain its historical gross margin percentages on its products, including Intel-based Macintosh computers, which may adversely impact the Company’s results of operations. Future operating results are dependent upon the Company’s ability to obtain a sufficient supply of components, including microprocessors, some of which are in short supply or available only from limited sources. Although most components essential to the Company’s business are generally available from multiple sources, certain key components including microprocessors and ASICs are currently obtained by the Company from single or limited sources. Some key components (including without limitation DRAM, NAND flash-memory, and TFT-LCD flat-panel displays), while currently available to the Company from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide availability and pricing pressures. In addition, new products introduced by the Company often initially utilize custom components obtained from only one source until the Company has evaluated whether there is a need for, and subsequently qualifies, additional suppliers. In situations where a component or product utilizes new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until such time as the suppliers’ yields have matured. The Company and other producers in the personal computer industry also compete for various components with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. The Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry including certain microprocessors and ASICs. Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of components other than those customized to meet the Company’s requirements. If the supply of a key component were to be delayed or constrained on a new or existing product, the Company’s results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. The Company’s ability to produce and market competitive products is dependent on the ability and desire of IBM and Freescale Semiconductor, Inc. (Freescale) to supply PowerPC microprocessors and Intel to supply its microprocessors for the Company’s Macintosh computers and to provide the Company with a sufficient supply of microprocessors with price/performance features that compare favorably to those supplied to the Company’s competitors. While the Company has supply agreements with IBM and Freescale, the Company’s recent announcement of plans to transition to Intel microprocessors may impact the continued availability on acceptable terms of certain components and services, including PowerPC G4 and G5 microprocessors, which are essential to the Company’s business and are currently obtained by the Company from sole or limited sources. Additionally, there have been instances in recent years where the inability of the Company’s suppliers to provide advanced PowerPC microprocessors in sufficient quantity has had significant adverse effects on the Company’s results of operations. In addition, IBM is currently the Company’s sole supplier of the PowerPC G5 processor, which is used in the Company’s current Power Mac, Xserve, and iMac G5 products. Freescale is the sole supplier of the G4 processor, which is used in the Company’s eMac, Mac mini, and portable products. IBM experienced manufacturing problems with the PowerPC G5 processor, which resulted in the Company delaying the shipment of various products and constrained certain product shipments during the second half of 2004 and the first quarter of 2005. Manufacturing problems experienced by any of the Company’s suppliers in the future or failure by them to deliver components to the Company in sufficient quantities with competitive price/performance features could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations and financial condition. The Company must successfully manage frequent product introductions and transitions to remain competitive and effectively stimulate customer demand. Due to the highly volatile and competitive nature of the personal computer and consumer electronics industries, which are characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company must continually introduce new products and technologies, enhance existing products in order to remain competitive, and effectively stimulate customer demand for new products and upgraded versions of the Company’s existing products. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance; the Company’s ability to manage the risks associated with product transitions, including the transition to Intel-based Macintosh computers, and production ramp issues; the availability of application software for new products; the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, including anticipated demand for PowerPC-based and Intel-based Macintosh computers; the availability of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand; and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. The Company’s products from time to time experience quality problems that can result in decreased net sales and operating profits. The Company sells highly complex hardware and software products that can contain defects in design and manufacture. Sophisticated operating system software and applications, such as those sold by the Company, often contain “bugs” that can unexpectedly interfere with the operation of the software. Defects may also occur in components and products the Company purchases from third-parties. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to detect and fix all defects in the hardware and software it sells. Failure to do so could result in lost revenue, loss of reputation, and significant warranty and other expense to remedy. Because orders for components, and in some cases commitments to purchase components, must be placed in advance of customer orders, the Company faces substantial inventory risk. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products that have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees of orders for inventories that have been cancelled. Although the Company believes its inventory and related provisions are currently adequate, given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the computer and consumer electronics industries and the transition to Intel-based Macintosh computers, no assurance can be given that the Company will not incur additional inventory and related charges. In addition, such charges have had, and may have, a material effect on the Company’s financial position and results of operations. The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company’s markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, and because of the transition to Intel-based Macintosh computers, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products. Consistent with industry practice, components are normally acquired through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company’s forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 150 days. The Company’s operating results and financial condition have been in the past and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company’s ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. The Company is dependent on manufacturing and logistics services provided by third parties, many of whom are located outside of the U.S. Most of the Company’s products are manufactured in whole or in part by third-party manufacturers. In addition, the Company has outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. While outsourcing arrangements may lower the cost of operations, they also reduce the Company’s direct control over production and distribution. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the products manufactured or services rendered, or the flexibility of the Company to respond to changing market conditions. Moreover, although arrangements with such manufacturers may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company may remain at least initially responsible to the consumer for warranty service in the event of product defects. Any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with contract manufacturers or otherwise, could adversely affect the Company’s future operating results and financial condition. Final assembly of products sold by the Company is currently performed in the Company’s manufacturing facility in Cork, Ireland, and by external vendors in Fremont, California, Fullerton, California, Taiwan, Korea, the People’s Republic of China, and the Czech Republic. Currently, manufacturing of many of the components used in the Company’s products is performed by third-party vendors in Taiwan, China, Japan, Korea, and Singapore. Final assembly of substantially all of the Company’s portable products including PowerBooks, iBooks, and iPods is performed by third-party vendors in China. If for any reason manufacturing or logistics in any of these locations is disrupted by regional economic, business, labor, environmental, public health, or political issues, as well as information technology system failures or military actions, the Company’s results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. The Company’s future operating performance is dependent on the performance of distributors and other resellers of the Company’s products. The Company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers, and cataloguers, many of whom distribute products from competing manufacturers. In addition, the Company sells many of its products and resells certain third-party products in most of its major markets directly to end users, certain education customers, and certain resellers through its online stores around the world and its retail stores. Many of the Company’s resellers operate on narrow product margins and have been negatively affected by weak economic conditions over the last several years. Considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company’s distribution and retail channel partners. The Company’s business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakens, if resellers within consumer channels were to cease distribution of the Company’s products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the Company’s products caused resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company’s products. The Company has invested and will continue to invest in various programs to enhance reseller sales, including staffing selected resellers’ stores with Company employees and contractors. These programs could require a substantial investment from the Company, while providing no assurance of return or incremental revenue to offset this investment. Over the past several years, an increasing proportion of the Company’s net sales has been made by the Company directly to end-users through its online stores around the world and through its retail stores in the U.S., Canada, Japan, and the U.K. Some of the Company’s resellers have perceived this expansion of the Company’s direct sales as conflicting with their own businesses and economic interests as distributors and resellers of the Company’s products. Perception of such a conflict could discourage the Company’s resellers from investing additional resources in the distribution and sale of the Company’s products or lead them to limit or cease distribution of the Company’s products. The Company’s business and financial results could be adversely affected if expansion of its direct sales to end-users causes some or all of its resellers to cease or limit distribution of the Company’s products. Further information regarding risks associated with Marketing and Distribution may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading “Markets and Distribution.” The Company relies on third-party digital content, which may not be available to the Company on commercially reasonable terms or at all. The Company contracts with third parties to offer their digital content to customers through the Company’s iTunes Music Store. The Company pays substantial fees to obtain the rights to offer to its customers this third-party digital content. The Company’s licensing arrangements with these third-party content providers are short-term in nature and do not guarantee the future renewal of these arrangements at commercially reasonable terms, if at all. Certain parties in the music industry have consolidated and formed alliances, which could limit the availability and increase the fees required to offer digital content to customers through the iTunes Music Store. Further, some third-party content providers currently, or may in the future, offer music products and services that compete with the Company’s music products and services, and could take action to make it more difficult or impossible for the Company to license their digital content in the future. If the Company is unable to continue to offer a wide variety of digital content at reasonable prices with acceptable usage rules, or continue to expand its geographic reach outside the U.S., then sales and gross margins of the Company’s iTunes Music Store as well as related hardware and peripherals, including iPods, may be adversely affected. Third-party content providers and artists require that the Company provide certain digital rights management solutions and other security mechanisms. If the requirements from content providers or artists change, then the Company may be required to further develop or license technology to address such new rights and requirements. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to develop or license such solutions at a reasonable cost and in a timely manner, if at all, which could have a materially adverse effect on the Company’s operating results and financial position. The Company’s future performance is dependent upon support from third-party software developers. If third-party software applications cease to be developed or available for the Company’s hardware products, then customers may choose not to buy the Company’s products. The Company believes that decisions by customers to purchase the Company’s personal computers, as opposed to Windows-based systems, are often based on the availability of third-party software for particular applications such as Microsoft Office. The Company also believes the availability of third-party application software for the Company’s hardware products depends in part on third-party developers’ perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining, and upgrading such software for the Company’s products versus software for the larger Windows market or growing Linux market. This analysis may be based on factors such as the perceived strength of the Company and its products, the anticipated potential revenue that may be generated, continued acceptance by customers of Mac OS X, and the costs of developing such software products. To the extent the minority market share held by the Company in the personal computer market has caused software developers to question the Company’s prospects in the personal computer market, developers could be less inclined to develop new application software or upgrade existing software for the Company’s products and more inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for the larger Windows market or growing Linux market. Moreover, there can be no assurance software developers will continue to develop software for Mac OS X, the Company’s operating system, on a timely basis or at all. In June 2005, the Company announced its plan to begin using Intel microprocessors in its Macintosh computers. The Company plans to begin shipping certain models with Intel microprocessors by June 2006 and to complete this transition to Intel microprocessors for all of its Macintosh computers by the end of calendar year 2007. The Company depends on third-party software developers to timely develop current and future applications that run on Intel and PowerPC microprocessors. The Company’s inability to timely deliver new Intel-based products, or a decline in available applications that run on the Company’s PowerPC products or the lack of applications that run on Intel-based Macintosh systems could have a materially adverse effect on the Company’s operating results and financial position. In addition, past and future development by the Company of its own software applications and solutions may negatively impact the decision of software developers, such as Microsoft and Adobe, to develop, maintain, and upgrade similar or competitive software for the Company’s products. The Company currently markets and sells a variety of software applications for use by professionals, consumers, and education customers that could influence the decisions of third-party software developers to develop or upgrade Macintosh-compatible software products. Software applications currently marketed by the Company include software for professional film and video editing, professional compositing and visual effects for large format film and video productions, professional music production and music post production, professional and consumer DVD encoding and authoring, professional digital photo editing and workflow management, consumer digital video and digital photo editing and management, digital music management, desktop-based database management, word processing, and high-quality presentations. The Company also markets an integrated productivity application that incorporates word processing, page layout, image manipulation, spreadsheets, databases, and presentations in a single application. Discontinuance of third-party products for the Macintosh platform, including Microsoft Office could have an adverse effect on the Company’s net sales and results of operations. The Company’s business relies on access to patents and intellectual property obtained from third parties, and the Company’s future results could be adversely affected if it is alleged or found to have infringed on the intellectual property rights of others. Many of the Company’s products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from third parties. While it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects of its products and business methods, the Company believes that based upon past experience and industry practice, such licenses generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. However, there can be no assurance that the necessary licenses would be available or available on acceptable terms. Because of technological changes in the computer and consumer electronics industries, current extensive patent coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible certain components of the Company’s products and business methods may unknowingly infringe existing patents of others. The Company has from time to time been notified that it may be infringing certain patents or other intellectual property rights of others. Responding to such claims, regardless of their merit, can be time-consuming, result in significant expenses, and cause the diversion of management and technical personnel. Several pending claims are in various stages of evaluation. The Company may consider the desirability of entering into licensing agreements in certain of these cases. However, no assurance can be given that such licenses can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. In the event there is a temporary or permanent injunction entered prohibiting the Company from marketing or selling certain of its products or a successful claim of infringement against the Company requiring it to pay royalties to a third-party, the Company’s future operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected. Information regarding certain claims and litigation involving the Company related to alleged patent infringement and other matters is set forth in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, the Company does not have a potential liability for damages or royalties from any current legal proceedings or claims related to the infringement of patent or other intellectual property rights of others that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its results of operations, or financial condition. However, the results of such legal proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of the matters related to infringement of patent or other intellectual property rights of others described in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K or should several of these matters be resolved against the Company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. The Company’s retail initiative has required and will continue to require a substantial investment and commitment of resources and is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. Through October 2005, the Company had opened 126 retail stores. The Company’s retail initiative has required substantial investment in equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory, and personnel. The Company has also entered into substantial operating lease commitments for retail space with lease terms ranging from 5 to 20 years, the majority of which are for 10 years. The Company could incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate this initiative or close individual stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations and financial condition. Additionally, a relatively high proportion of the Retail segment’s costs are fixed because of depreciation on store construction costs and lease expense. As a result, significant losses would result should the Retail segment experience a significant decline in sales for any reason. Certain of the Company’s stores have been designed and built to serve as high profile venues that function as vehicles for general corporate marketing, corporate events, and brand awareness. Because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores require substantially more investment in equipment and leasehold improvements than the Company’s more typical retail stores. The Company has opened seven such stores through October 2005. Because of their location and size, these high profile stores also require the Company to enter into substantially larger operating lease commitments compared to those required for its more typical stores. Current leases on such locations have terms ranging from 10 to 14 years with total remaining commitments per location ranging from $4 million to $46 million. Closure or poor performance of one of these high profile stores could have a particularly significant negative impact on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition. Many of the general risks and uncertainties the Company faces could also have an adverse impact on its Retail segment. Also, many factors unique to retail operations present risks and uncertainties, some of which are beyond the Company’s control, that could adversely affect the Retail segment’s future results, cause its actual results to differ from those currently expected, and/or have an adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated results of operations. Potential risks and uncertainties unique to retail operations that could have an adverse impact on the Retail segment include, among other things, macro-economic factors that have a negative impact on general retail activity; inability to manage costs associated with store construction and operation; failure to attract new users to the Macintosh platform; inability to sell third-party hardware and software products at adequate margins; failure to manage relationships with existing retail channel partners; lack of experience in managing retail operations outside the U.S.; costs associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value of Apple-branded and third-party retail inventory; and inability to obtain quality retail locations at reasonable cost. Investment in new business strategies and initiatives could disrupt the Company’s ongoing business and may present risks not originally contemplated. The Company has and may in the future invest in new business strategies or engage in acquisitions that complement the Company’s strategic direction and product roadmap. Such endeavors may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including distraction of management’s attention away from normal business operations; insufficient revenue generation to offset liabilities assumed and expenses associated with the strategy; and unidentified issues not discovered in the Company’s due diligence process. Because these new ventures are inherently risky, no assurance can be given that such strategies and initiatives will be successful and will not materially adversely affect the Company’s business, operating results or financial condition. Declines in the sales of the Company’s professional products, software, accessories, or service and support contracts, or increases in sales of consumer products, including iPods, may negatively impact the Company’s gross margin and operating margin percentages. The Company’s professional products, including Power Macintosh and PowerBook systems, software, accessories, and service and support contracts, generally have higher gross margins than the Company’s consumer products, including iMacs, iBooks, iPods, and content from the iTunes Music Store. A shift in sales mix away from higher margin professional products towards lower margin consumer products could adversely affect the Company’s future gross margin and operating margin percentages. The Company’s traditional professional customers may choose to buy consumer products, specifically the iMac G5 and iBook, instead of professional products. Professional users may choose to buy the iMac G5 due to its relative price performance, use of the same PowerPC G5 processor used in the Company’s Power Macs, and unique design featuring a flat panel screen. Potential PowerBook customers may also choose to purchase iBooks instead due to their price performance and screen size. Additionally, significant future growth in iPod sales without corresponding growth in higher margin product sales could also reduce gross margin and operating margin percentages. It is likely that some of the Company’s current and potential professional, creative, and small business customers, who are most likely to utilize professional systems, believe that the relatively slower MHz rating or clock speed of the microprocessors the Company utilizes in its Macintosh systems compares unfavorably to those utilized by other computer manufacturers and translates to slower overall system performance. These factors may result in an adverse impact to sales of the Company’s professional products as well as to gross margin and operating margin percentages. The Company expects its quarterly revenue and operating results to fluctuate for a variety of reasons. The Company’s profit margins vary among its products and its distribution channels. The Company’s direct sales, primarily through its retail and online stores, generally have higher associated profitability than its indirect sales. Additionally, the Company’s direct channels have traditionally had more sales of software and higher priced hardware products, which generally have higher gross margins, than its indirect channels. As a result, the Company’s gross margin and operating margin percentages as well as overall profitability may be adversely impacted as a result of a shift in product, geographic, or channel mix, or new product announcements, including the transition to Intel-based Macintosh computers. In addition, the Company generally sells more products during the third month of each quarter than it does during either of the first two months, a pattern typical in the personal computer industry. This sales pattern can produce pressure on the Company’s internal infrastructure during the third month of a quarter and may adversely impact the Company’s ability to predict its financial results accurately. Developments late in a quarter, such as lower-than-anticipated demand for the Company’s products, an internal systems failure, or failure of one of the Company’s key logistics, components suppliers, or manufacturing partners, can have significant adverse impacts on the Company and its results of operations and financial condition. The Company has higher research and development and selling, general and administrative costs, as a percentage of revenue, than many of its competitors. The Company’s ability to compete successfully and maintain attractive gross margins and revenue growth is heavily dependent upon its ability to ensure a continuing and timely flow of innovative and competitive products and technologies to the marketplace. As a result, the Company incurs higher research and development costs as a percentage of revenue than its competitors who sell personal computers based on other operating systems. Many of these competitors seek to compete aggressively on price and maintain very low cost structures. Further, as a result of the expansion of the Company’s Retail segment and costs associated with marketing the Company’s brand including its unique operating system, the Company incurs higher selling costs as a percentage of revenue than many of its competitors. If the Company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new products with attractive gross margins, its results of operations may be materially adversely affected by its operating cost structure. The Company is exposed to credit risk on its accounts receivable and prepayments related to long-term supply agreements. This risk is heightened during periods when economic conditions worsen. The Company distributes its products through third-party computer resellers and retailers and directly to certain educational institutions and commercial customers. A substantial majority of the Company’s outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral or credit insurance. The Company also has unsecured non-trade receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale by the Company of raw material components to these manufacturing vendors who manufacture sub-assemblies or assemble final products for the Company. In addition, the Company has entered into long-term supply agreements to secure supply of NAND flash-memory and intends to prepay a total of $1.25 billion under these agreements. While the Company has procedures in place to monitor and limit exposure to credit risk on its trade and non-trade receivables as well as long-term prepayments, there can be no assurance that such procedures will be effective in limiting its credit risk and avoiding losses. Additionally, if the global economy and regional economies fail to improve or continue to deteriorate, it becomes more likely that the Company will incur a material loss or losses as a result of the weakening financial condition of one or more of its customers or manufacturing vendors. The Company’s success depends largely on its ability to attract and retain key personnel. Much of the future success of the Company depends on the continued service and availability of skilled personnel, including its Chief Executive Officer, members of its executive team, and those in technical, marketing and staff positions. Experienced personnel in the information technology industry are in high demand and competition for their talents is intense, especially in the Silicon Valley, where the majority of the Company’s key employees are located. The Company has relied on its ability to grant stock options as one mechanism for recruiting and retaining this highly skilled talent. Recent accounting regulations requiring the expensing of stock options will impair the Company’s future ability to provide these incentives without incurring significant compensation costs. There can be no assurance that the Company will continue to successfully attract and retain key personnel. The Company is subject to risks associated with the selection, availability, and cost of insurance. The Company has observed rapidly changing conditions in the insurance markets relating to nearly all areas of traditional commercial insurance. Such conditions have and may continue to result in higher premium costs, higher policy deductibles, lower coverage limits and may also yield possible policy form exclusions. For some risks, because of cost and/or availability, the Company does not have insurance coverage. Because the Company retains some portion of its insurable risks, and in some cases self insures completely, unforeseen or catastrophic losses in excess of insured limits may have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations and financial position. Failure of information technology systems and breaches in the security of data upon which the Company relies could adversely affect the Company’s future operating results. Information technology system failures and breaches of data security could disrupt the Company’s ability to function in the normal course of business by potentially causing delays or cancellation of customer orders, impeding the manufacture or shipment of products, or resulting in the unintentional disclosure of customer or Company information. Management has taken steps to address these concerns for its own systems by implementing sophisticated network security and internal control measures. However, there can be no assurance that a system failure or data security breach of the Company or a third-party vendor will not have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations. The Company’s business is subject to the risks of international operations. A large portion of the Company’s revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company’s operating results and financial condition could be significantly affected by risks associated with international activities, including economic and labor conditions, political instability, tax laws (including U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiaries), and changes in the value of the U.S. dollar versus the local currency in which the products are sold and goods and services are purchased. The Company’s primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relate to non-dollar denominated sales in Europe, Japan, Australia, Canada, and certain parts of Asia and non-dollar denominated operating expenses incurred throughout the world. Weaknesses in foreign currencies, particularly the Japanese Yen and the Euro, can adversely impact consumer demand for the Company’s products and the U.S. dollar value of the Company’s foreign currency denominated sales. Conversely, a strengthening in these and other foreign currencies can cause the Company to modify international pricing and affect the value of the Company’s foreign denominated sales, and in some cases, may also increase the cost to the Company of some product components. Margins on sales of the Company’s products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties. Derivative instruments, such as foreign exchange forward and option positions have been utilized by the Company to hedge exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. The use of such hedging activities may not offset more than a portion of the adverse financial impact resulting from unfavorable movements in foreign exchange rates. Further information related to the Company’s global market risks may be found in Part II, Item 7A Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7A. Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Item 7A. Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The Company's actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition" below. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. Critical Accounting Policies The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles and the Company's discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations requires the Company's management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K describe the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company's consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Management believes the following to be critical accounting policies. That is, they are both important to the portrayal of the Company's financial condition and results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Revenue Recognition The Company recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting standards, including Statement of Position (SOP) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as amended, and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 101, Revenue Recognition in Financial Statements. SAB 101, as amended, summarizes certain of the SEC's views in applying generally accepted accounting principles to revenue recognition in financial statements and provides guidance on revenue recognition issues in the absence of authoritative literature addressing a specific arrangement or a specific industry. The Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collectibility is probable. Product is considered delivered to the customer once it has been shipped, and title and risk of loss have been transferred. Revenue on multiple element sales arrangements is allocated to various elements based on vendor specific objective evidence of the fair value of each element of the transaction and is recognized as each element is delivered. The Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end user rebates and other sales programs and volume-based incentives. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in incremental reductions of revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally, certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company distributes its products through third-party computer resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and commercial customers. The Company generally does not require collateral from its customers. However, when possible, the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables through the use of flooring arrangements for selected customers with third-party financing companies and credit insurance for certain customers in Europe, Asia, and Latin America. However, considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral, flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company's distribution and retail channel partners. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management's assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of the credit worthiness and financial condition of those specific customers. The Company records an allowance to reduce the specific receivables to the amount that is reasonably believed to be collectible. The Company also records an allowance for all other trade receivables based on multiple factors including historical experience with bad debts, the general economic environment, the financial condition of the Company's distribution channels, and the aging of such receivables. If there is a deterioration of a major customer's financial condition, if the Company becomes aware of additional information related to the credit worthiness of a major customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Company may have to adjust its allowance for doubtful accounts, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made. Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed review of inventory each period that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product lifecycle status, product development plans, and component cost trends. The personal computer industry is subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence. If future demand or market conditions for the Company's products are less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required to record additional write-downs which would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the write-downs are made. The Company accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees related to component orders that have been canceled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of formal purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These formal and informal commitments typically cover the Company's requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 130 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company's products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the Company's products, the Company may be required to record additional reserves for cancellation fees, negatively affecting gross margins in the period when the cancellation fees are identified. Valuation of Long-Lived Assets Including Acquired Intangibles The Company reviews property, plant, and equipment and certain identifiable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of their carrying amount to future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized in earnings equals the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds their fair market value. Although the Company has recognized no material impairment adjustments related to its property, plant, and equipment or identifiable intangibles during the past three fiscal years, except those made in conjunction with restructuring actions, deterioration in the Company's business in a geographic region or business segment in the future, including deterioration in the performance of individual retail stores, could lead to such impairment adjustments in the future periods in which such business issues are identified. As of September 28, 2002, the Company had $85 million in goodwill. The Company adopted SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in the first quarter of fiscal 2002. As a result, the Company no longer amortizes goodwill but instead performs a review of goodwill for impairment annually, or earlier if indicators of potential impairment exist. The review of goodwill for potential impairment is highly subjective and requires that: (1) goodwill be allocated to various business units of the Company's business to which it relates; (2) the Company estimate the fair value of those business units to which the goodwill relates; and (3) the Company determine the book value of those business units. If the estimated fair value of business units with allocated goodwill is determined to be less than their book value, the Company is required to estimate the fair value of all identifiable assets and liabilities of those business units in a manner similar to a purchase price allocation for an acquired business. This requires independent valuation of certain internally developed and unrecognized assets including in-process research and development and developed technology. Once this process is complete, the amount of goodwill impairment, if any, can be determined. Based on the Company's estimates as of September 28, 2002, there was no impairment of goodwill. However, changes in various circumstances including changes in the Company's market capitalization, changes in the Company's forecasts, and changes in the Company's internal business structure could cause one or more of the Company's business units to be valued differently thereby causing an impairment of goodwill. Additionally, in response to changes in the personal computer industry and changes in global or regional economic conditions, the Company may strategically realign its resources and consider restructuring, disposing of, or otherwise exiting businesses, which could result in an impairment of property, plant, and equipment, identifiable intangibles, or goodwill. Valuation of Non-Current Debt and Equity Investments As of September 28, 2002, the Company held investments in certain debt and equity securities with a combined carrying value of $39 million. These investments, which are reflected in the consolidated balance sheets as non-current debt and equity investments, have been categorized as available-for-sale requiring that they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. The Company recognizes an impairment charge to earnings when it is judged an investment has experienced a decline in value that is other-than-temporary. The Company has recognized material impairment charges related to its non-current debt and equity investments in two quarters during the last two fiscal years. Various factors are considered in determining whether a decline in value is other-than-temporary, including the length of time and extent to which the investment's market value has been less than its cost basis, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, and the Company's intent and ability to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. The Company's non-current debt and equity investments are in public companies whose security prices are subject to significant volatility. The Company recognized a pre-tax impairment loss of $50 million related to two of these investments in the fourth quarter of 2002. As a result, as of September 28, 2002, the Company had no significant unrealized gains or losses recorded against the carrying value of its non-current debt and equity investments. Should the fair value of these investments fall below the Company's current cost bases and/or the financial condition or prospects of either company deteriorate, the Company may determine in a future period that such a decline in fair value is other-than-temporary, requiring an impairment loss be recognized in the period such a determination is made. Additional information regarding these investments and potential charges related to their impairment may be found below under the caption "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." Net Sales Net sales and Macintosh unit sales for geographic segments and by product follow (net sales in millions and Macintosh unit sales in thousands): (a)Includes server sales and amounts previously reported as Power Macintosh G4 Cube. (b)Based on net sales associated with Macintosh units and total Macintosh units sold. Net sales increased $379 million or 7% during 2002 compared to 2001, while Macintosh unit sales were relatively flat year-over-year at approximately 3.1 million units. On a geographic basis, performance in the domestic market was relatively strong, especially when considering the performance of the Company's Retail segment which currently operates exclusively in the United States. However, the European and Japanese markets remained sluggish throughout 2002. The Company's net sales in 2002 were positively influenced by a number of factors. First, net sales from software, service, and other sources rose $248 million or 26% in 2002 versus 2001. This increase was driven by several factors including a 28% increase in combined third-party and Apple- branded software sales; $143 million in net sales of iPod, the Company's portable digital music player that was introduced in the first half of 2002; a 9% increase in the sale of computer accessories; and a 14% increase in service revenue caused primarily by increased revenue associated with extended maintenance and support contracts. The growth in software revenue was primarily the result of increased sales of third-party software in the Company's retail and online stores and expansion in recent years in the number of Apple-branded software titles. Second, overall unit sales of Macintosh portable systems grew by 92,000 units or 10% in 2002 reflecting a general trend in the personal computer market away from desktop systems towards portable systems. During 2002, portable Macintosh systems represented 33% of total systems sales versus 31% in 2001 and 20% in 2000. Growth in this area has been most pronounced for iBook, the Company's education and consumer oriented portable Macintosh system. iBook unit sales increased 14% in 2002 and 9% in 2001. Third, the Company's Retail segment grew from 8 stores at the end of 2001 to 40 stores at the end of 2002. The Retail segment's net sales grew from $19 million in 2001 to $283 million in 2002. While the Retail segment may cannibalize some net sales from the Company's preexisting sales channels in the U.S., the Company does believe that a substantial portion of the Retail segment's net sales are incremental to the Company's total net sales. See additional comments below related to the Retail segment under the heading "Segment Operating Performance." Fourth, the Company's average unit pricing remained relatively stable during 2002 as a result of various changes in overall unit mix offset by somewhat lower pricing year-over-year on comparative Macintosh systems. Net sales per Macintosh unit sold during 2002 of $1,462 per unit reflects the shift in mix towards relatively higher-priced portable Macintosh systems and reflects the impact on net sales of the relatively higher-priced new iMac design introduced during 2002. The impact of these changes in mix were offset by the decline in unit sales of relatively higher-priced Power Macintosh systems and by lower pricing on comparative Macintosh systems during 2002 for most of the Company's Macintosh product lines in response to industry pricing pressure. Fifth, any comparison of net sales in 2002 versus 2001 must consider the effect of unusually low net sales during the first quarter of 2001. As discussed below, this was attributable to several factors at the beginning of 2001, including continuing deterioration in worldwide demand for personal computers, rebate programs and price cuts instituted by the Company during that quarter that cost the Company approximately $138 million, and a plan implemented by the Company during the first quarter of 2001 to reduce substantially the level of inventory in its distribution channels that resulted in a decline in channel inventory of approximately 300,000 units during that quarter. Net sales during the first quarter of 2001 are discussed in more detail below. Offsetting the favorable factors discussed above, the Company's net sales in 2002 were negatively impacted by several notable factors. First, unit sales of Power Macintosh systems fell 18% during 2002 as compared to 2001. This followed a 35% decline in Power Macintosh unit sales in 2001 from 2000. The Company continues to believe that weak economic conditions over the past several years are having a pronounced negative impact on its professional and creative customers and that many of these customers continue to delay upgrades of their Power Macintosh systems due to the Company's ongoing transition to Mac OS X, its new operating system, and in anticipation of certain software vendors transitioning their Macintosh applications to run natively in Mac OS X. Further, the Company did not experience the anticipated increase in Power Macintosh sales that it expected following the introduction of Adobe's PhotoShop 7 during 2002. Additionally, many professional users may have postponed upgrading their systems until after the introduction of Mac OS X Jaguar released in the fourth quarter of 2002. Others may have delayed upgrading until after the availability of other professionally oriented software applications for Mac OS X such as QuarkXpress. Second, despite the overall increase in net sales during 2002 in the Americas, the Company continues to see weakness in its U.S. education channel. Total net sales in this channel fell 15% in 2002 and 4% in 2001. These declines are consistent with industry data that shows the Company losing market share in the U.S. education market in each of the last two fiscal years. The Company believes this weakness has been caused by multiple factors, including increased price competition in this price sensitive market from the Company's competitors who sell Windows-based personal computers. Additionally, some of the Company's education customers appear to be delaying technology purchases due to concerns about the overall impact of the weaker economy on their available funding. The Company continues to take steps to address weakness in the U.S. education channel. However, it is difficult to anticipate how this trend will affect fiscal 2003 and to anticipate when and if this trend will reverse. Third, the personal computer industry in general and the Company specifically continue to see relatively soft demand for its products. Despite an overall increase in unit sales of consumer oriented Macintosh systems during 2002, consumer sales remain far below levels experienced in 2000 and earlier. Worsening global economic conditions over the past three years exacerbated by the economic and political uncertainties caused by terrorist activities and the associated international responses have clearly had a pronounced negative effect on the overall demand for the Company's products in virtually all of its markets. Further, growth in the overall personal computer industry has been slowed due to the high market penetration of personal computers and a lengthening of consumer, creative, and business personal computer upgrade cycles. In short, the Company believes that expansion in the overall market for personal computers has for the most part stalled and that growth awaits a combination of economic recovery and technological advancements. Net sales decreased $2.6 billion or 33% during 2001 compared to 2000, while Macintosh unit sales fell 32% from 2000. Demand for all of the Company's products in all of the Company's geographic operating segments was negatively impacted throughout 2001 by unfavorable global economic conditions. On a year-over-year basis, net sales and Macintosh unit sales were down in all of the Company's geographic operating segments, and net sales and unit sales by product were down for each Macintosh product category except iBook. In addition to general economic conditions, two other primary factors contributed to the decline in net sales during 2001. First, as discussed below, the Company executed a plan during the first three quarters of 2001 to reduce substantially the level of inventory in its distribution channels. As a result of these efforts, the Company's Macintosh channel inventory fell by approximately 450,000 units during the first nine months of 2001. Second, the Company believes that many of its professional users were delaying upgrades of their Power Macintosh systems due to the Company's ongoing transition to Mac OS X, its new operating system, and in anticipation of software vendors transitioning their Mac applications to run natively in Mac OS X. Several positive factors combined to partially mitigate the overall decline in net sales during 2001. The net sales per Macintosh unit sold remained relatively strong during 2001 after adjusting for the $138 million impact to net sales of the rebate programs and price cuts instituted by the Company during the first quarter of 2001, falling only about 2.5% from 2000. The relatively strong per unit sales in 2001 reflects somewhat lower year-over-year pricing on comparative systems, offset by a shift in overall sales mix toward higher-priced portable systems. Also, the Company experienced very little shift in the mix of overall combined unit sales of relatively lower-priced consumer and education Macintosh systems, iMac and iBook, and their higher-priced professionally oriented equivalents. Combined unit sales of iMac and iBook systems accounted for 58% of total Macintosh unit sales in 2001 and 60% in 2000. Second, combined unit sales of portable systems, iBook and PowerBook, actually rose 2% during 2001 despite the negative economic climate and the overall decline in unit sales. Not only does this increase in portable system sales reflect a general industry shift toward portable systems, it is also specifically attributable to the strong demand for redesigned iBooks introduced during the third quarter of 2001 and for the Titanium PowerBook G4 which was introduced during the second quarter of 2001. Third, a small decline in net sales in the U.S. education market during 2001 compared to 2000 was partially mitigated by a 7% increase in U.S. education unit sales during 2001. First quarter 2001 net sales decreased 57% to $1.007 billion compared to the same quarter in 2000 and decreased 46% from the fourth quarter of 2000. Both the year-over-year and sequential declines in net sales during the first quarter of 2001 were attributable to several factors, including continued deterioration in worldwide demand for personal computers and rebate programs and price cuts instituted by the Company during the quarter that cost the Company approximately $138 million. In addition, the Company implemented a plan during the first quarter to reduce substantially the level of inventory in its distribution channels from the amounts at the end of fiscal 2000 to lower levels by the end of the first quarter of 2001. The Company ended fiscal 2000 with substantially more inventory in its distribution channels than planned due to the lower than expected sell-through of the Company's products during the fourth quarter of that year. The Company reduced Macintosh channel inventory during the first quarter by approximately 300,000 units. These factors contributed to the 52% year-over-year decline during the first quarter in total Macintosh unit sales that were experienced across the Company's entire product line. These factors also reduced the net sales per Macintosh unit sold (a function of total net sales associated with Macintosh units and total Macintosh CPU unit sales) during the first quarter of 2001 to $1,476, a decline of approximately 12% from the same period in 2000. Segment Operating Performance The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company's reportable operating segments include the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The Americas segment includes both North and South America, except for the Company's Retail segment. The European segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Japan segment includes only Japan. The Retail segment operates Apple-owned retail stores in the United States. Each reportable geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company's operating segments may be found in Part II, Item 8 on this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 11, "Segment Information and Geographic Data." Americas Net sales for the Americas segment increased 3% or $92 million in 2002. As discussed above, the Americas segment was negatively affected by a decline in U.S. education sales in 2002 of $215 million. The Americas segment also experienced a 17% decline in Power Macintosh unit sales. However, outside of the U.S. education channel, unit sales of consumer desktop and portable systems rebounded from the substantial declines experienced in 2001, rising a combined 31% in 2002. Sales of software, peripherals, and accessories were also up in the Americas during 2002. Growth in unit sales of consumer oriented systems during 2002 in the Americas is somewhat attributable to the significantly depressed level of net sales experienced in the first quarter of 2001 discussed above. However, growth in the Americas was somewhat negatively affected, particularly with respect to consumer-oriented systems, by the significant growth of the Company's Retail segment in the U.S. More than 70% of the Retail segment's Macintosh unit sales during 2002 were for iMacs and iBooks. The Americas segment's 2001 net sales and unit sales declined 30% and 29%, respectively, from 2000. The operating performance of the Americas segment for 2001 reflects the Company's overall performance characterized by significant declines in year-over-year quarterly net sales and units sales, particularly during the first quarter and particularly in consumer channels, with sequential increases in unit sales and net sales during each of the last three quarters of 2001. Net sales in the Americas segment during 2001 were also negatively affected by the Company's overall reduction in channel inventories during the year. Consumer sales in the Americas were particularly hard hit by current economic conditions. Outside of the U.S. education channel, unit sales of the Company's consumer oriented iMac fell 64% in 2001. The effect of falling consumer demand in the Americas segment was partially offset by strong U.S. education sales. The Company's unit sales in U.S. education markets rose 7% in 2001 driven by the acceptance of the Company's new portable products, particularly the iBook, and reflect a general shift in demand in the U.S. education market towards portable versus desktop systems. Portable systems accounted for 28% of total unit sales in the Company's U.S. education market in 2001 compared to 18% during 2000. During 2002 and 2001, the Americas segment represented approximately 54% and 56%, respectively, of the Company's total net sales and represented approximately 56% and 57%, respectively, of total Macintosh unit sales. Europe Economic conditions in Europe remained weak throughout 2002, and the overall demand for the Company's products in that region remained flat during 2002 versus 2001. Unit sales in Europe for 2002 reflect relatively stronger demand for consumer-oriented products, particularly iBook whose unit sales increased 27% in 2002, offset by declines in Power Macintosh unit sales. Net sales in Europe fell $568 million or 31% during 2001 compared to 2000, while Europe's unit sales fell 32%. Europe's results reflect the worsening economic climate in Europe in the latter half of 2001 and reductions in channel inventories as experienced in the Company's other geographic operating segments. Combined unit sales of the Company's consumer oriented products in Europe were particularly impacted during 2001, falling 40% from 2000. Japan Net sales in Japan remained flat during 2002 versus 2001, with a slight decline in unit sales of 2%. Consistent with the Company's other geographic operating segments, during 2002 Japan showed growth in unit sales of consumer systems and a decline in unit sales of Power Macintosh systems. Japan's iMac unit sales increased 85% in 2002. However, in the case of Japan the increase in iMac unit shipments in 2002 versus 2001 was primarily the result of the unusually depressed level of net sales experienced by the Company in the first quarter of 2001 discussed above. Additionally, net sales in Japan on a sequential and year-over-year comparative basis generally worsened as 2002 progressed reflecting particularly poor economic conditions that currently exist in Japan. Net sales and unit sales in Japan fell 47% and 46%, respectively, in 2001 versus 2000. Although unit sales and net sales in Japan have generally trended upwards as 2001 progressed, the Japan segment has been particularly affected by current unfavorable economic conditions. Reflecting the continuing harsh consumer climate in Japan, the Japan segment's combined unit sales of iMacs and iBooks during 2001 were down 58% from 2000, and professionally oriented systems unit sales fell 30%. Retail By the end of September 2002, the Company had 40 retail stores operating in the United States, 32 of which were opened during fiscal 2002. The Company has opened 11 additional stores during the first quarter of 2003. During 2002, approximately 39% of the Retail segment's net sales came from the sale of Apple-branded and third-party peripherals and software. This compares to 21% for the Company as a whole. With an average of 35 stores open, the Retail segment achieved average annualized revenue per store during the fourth quarter of approximately $12 million and had approximately 2.25 million visitors. The Retail segment reported a loss for all of 2002 of $22 million, and a loss for the fourth quarter of 2002 of $3 million. Expansion of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other operating expenses. Capital expenditures associated with the Retail segment totaled $106 million in 2002 and $92 million in 2001. As of September 28, 2002, the Retail segment had 807 employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with retail store space and related facilities of $209 million. The Company would incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate its Retail segment or close individual stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company's results of operations and financial condition. Investment in a new business model such as the Retail segment is inherently risky, particularly in light of the significant investment involved, the current economic climate, and the fixed nature of a substantial portion of the Retail segment's operating expenses. Results for this segment are dependent upon a number of risks and uncertainties, some of which are discussed below under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." Backlog In the Company's experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following new product introductions because of over-ordering by dealers anticipating shortages. Backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, backlog cannot be considered a reliable indicator of the Company's ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance. Further information regarding the Company's backlog may be found below under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." Gross Margin Gross margin for the three fiscal years ended September 28, 2002 are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): Gross margin increased to 28% of net sales in 2002 from 23% in 2001. As discussed below, gross margin in 2001 was unusually low resulting from negative gross margin of 2% experienced in the first quarter of 2001. As a percentage of net sales, the Company's quarterly gross margins declined during fiscal 2002 from 31% in the first quarter down to 26% in the fourth quarter. This decline resulted from several factors including a rise in component costs as the year progressed and aggressive pricing by the Company across its products lines instituted as a result of continued pricing pressures in the personal computer industry. The Company anticipates that its gross margin and the gross margin of the overall personal computer industry will remain under pressure throughout fiscal 2003 in light of weak economic conditions, flat demand for personal computers in general, and the resulting pressure on prices. The foregoing statements regarding anticipated gross margin in 2003 and the general demand for personal computers during 2003 are forward-looking. Gross margin could differ from anticipated levels because of several factors, including certain of those set forth below in the subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." There can be no assurance that current gross margins will be maintained, targeted gross margin levels will be achieved, or current margins on existing individual products will be maintained. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services, and potential changes to the Company's product mix, including higher unit sales of consumer products with lower average selling prices and lower gross margins. In response to these downward pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company's ability to effectively manage quality problems and warranty costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. The Company's operating strategy and pricing take into account anticipated changes in foreign currency exchange rates over time; however, the Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. The Company orders components for its products and builds inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products or components. The Company's operating results and financial condition have been in the past and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and outstanding purchase commitments and to respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. Gross margin declined to 23% of net sales in 2001 from 27% in 2000. This decline resulted primarily from gross margin of negative 2% experienced during the first quarter of 2001 compared to 26% gross margin for the same quarter in 2000. In addition to lower than normal net sales, first quarter 2001 margins were negatively impacted by the rebate programs and price cuts discussed above that decreased revenue by approximately $138 million. Additionally, actual and forecasted declines in net sales caused the Company to recognize during the first quarter of 2001 approximately $122 million of charges associated with purchase order cancellations and loss commitments for component purchases. Without these charges, gross margin for the first quarter of 2001 would have been approximately 21%, and gross margin for all of 2001 would have been approximately 27%. As a percentage of net sales, the Company's gross margin increased each quarter as 2001 progressed reaching 30% during the fourth quarter. This pattern reflects the favorable impact during 2001 of declining component costs, especially for DRAM, hard drives, and flat panel screens. Operating Expenses Operating expenses for the three fiscal years ended September 28, 2002 are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): Research and Development (R&D) The Company recognizes that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company's core business strategy. R&D expense increased 4% or $16 million to $446 million in 2002 as compared to 2001. This followed a $50 million or 13% increase in 2001 as compared to 2000. The overall increase in R&D expense over the last two years relates primarily to increased R&D headcount and support for new product development activities. R&D spending in 2002 also included capitalized software development costs of approximately $13.3 million associated with the development of Mac OS X Jaguar and approximately $6 million associated with the new PowerSchool enterprise student information system. R&D spending in 2001 also included capitalized software development costs of approximately $5.4 million associated with the development of the original version of Mac OS X. Further information related to the Company's capitalization of software development costs may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Selling, General, and Administrative Expense (SG&A) SG&A decreased $27 million or 2% during 2002 as compared to 2001. The decrease in SG&A in 2002 is primarily the result of lower discretionary spending on marketing and advertising expenses, decreased spending related to information systems, and benefits directly related to the Company's restructuring actions in 2002 and 2001. These decreases were partially offset by higher sales expense in 2002 resulting from increased operating expenses associated with expansion of the Company's Retail segment. SG&A expenditures decreased $28 million or 2% during 2001 as compared to 2000. Declines in SG&A spending in both 2002 and 2001 reflect the Company's overall efforts to stabilize and selectively reduce recurring SG&A costs in light of lower net sales and to reduce discretionary marketing and advertising expenses. Given current economic conditions and the Company's continued strategic investments in new product development and its Retail segment, the Company is currently identifying additional opportunities to make appropriate reductions in SG&A costs. Special Charges Included in Operating Expenses Special charges included in operating expense for the three fiscal years ended September 28, 2002 are as follows (in millions): 2002 Restructuring Actions During fiscal 2002, the Company recorded total restructuring charges of $30 million related to actions intended to eliminate certain activities and better align the Company's operating expenses with existing general economic conditions and to partially offset the cost of continuing investments in new product development and investments in the Company's Retail operating segment. Once fully implemented, the Company estimates these restructuring actions will result in reduced quarterly operating expenses of approximately $10 million. Of the $30 million restructuring charge for fiscal 2002, $6 million was incurred in the fourth quarter of 2002 related to actions designed to reduce headcount costs in Corporate operations and sales and to adjust its PowerSchool product strategy. Headcount actions, primarily in Corporate operations, sales, and PowerSchool related research and development, resulted in the elimination of approximately 180 positions worldwide at a cost of $1.8 million. The shift in product strategy at PowerSchool included discontinuing development and marketing of a PowerSchool product that resulted in the impairment of previously capitalized development costs associated with the product in the amount of $4.5 million. The remaining charge in 2002 of $24 million was incurred in the first quarter of 2002 and will ultimately result in the elimination of approximately 425 positions worldwide, 415 of which were eliminated by September 28, 2002, at a cost of $8 million. Positions were eliminated primarily in the Company's operations, information systems, and administrative functions. In addition, these restructuring actions also included significant changes in the Company's information systems strategy resulting in termination of equipment leases and cancellation of existing projects and activities. Related lease and contract cancellation charges totaled $12 million, and charges for asset impairments totaled $4 million. Of the total charge in 2002 of $30 million, substantially all had been spent by September 28, 2002, except for approximately $1 million related primarily to future payments on abandoned operating leases. 2000 Restructuring Actions During the first quarter of 2000, the Company initiated restructuring actions resulting in recognition of an $8 million restructuring charge. This charge was comprised of $3 million for the write-off of various operating assets and $5 million for severance payments to approximately 95 employees associated with consolidation of various domestic and international sales and marketing functions. Of the $5 million accrued for severance, $2.5 million had been spent before the end of 2000, and the remainder was spent in 2001. Of the $3 million accrued for the write-off of various assets, substantially all was utilized before the end of 2000. Purchased In-Process Research and Development (IPR&D) During the fourth quarter of 2002, the Company acquired Emagic GmbH, a provider of professional software solutions for computer based music production, for approximately $30 million in cash; $551,000 of which was allocated to IPR&D. The amount of the purchase price allocated to IPR&D was expensed upon acquisition, because the technological feasibility of products under development had not been established and no alternative future uses existed. The IPR&D relates primarily to Emagic's Logic series technology and extensions. At the date of the acquisition, the products under development were between 43%-83% complete, and it was expected that the remaining work would be completed during the Company's fiscal 2003 at a cost of approximately $415,000. The remaining efforts include finalizing user interface design and development, and testing. The fair value of the IPR&D was determined by an independent third-party valuation using the income approach, which reflects the projected free cash flows that will be generated by the IPR&D projects and that are attributable to the acquired technology, and discounting the projected net cash flows back to their present value using a discount rate of 25%. In May 2001, the Company acquired PowerSchool, Inc. (PowerSchool), a provider of web-based student information systems for K-12 schools and districts that enables schools to record, access, report, and manage their student data and performance in real-time, and gives parents real-time web access to track their children's progress. Of total purchase consideration of $66.1 million, $10.8 million was allocated to IPR&D and was expensed upon acquisition because the technological feasibility of products under development had not been established and no alternative future uses existed. The IPR&D relates to technologies representing processes and expertise employed to design, develop, and deploy a functioning, scalable web-based student information system for use by K-12 schools. At the date of the acquisition, the PowerSchool product under development was approximately 50% complete, and it was expected that the remaining 50% would be completed during the Company's fiscal 2002 at a cost of approximately $9.25 million. The remaining efforts, which were completed during 2002, included completion of coding, finalizing user interface design and development, and testing. The fair value of the IPR&D was determined by an independent third-party valuation using the income approach, which reflects the projected free cash flows that will be generated by the IPR&D projects and that are attributable to the acquired technology, and discounting the projected net cash flows back to their present value using a discount rate of 25%. Executive Bonus During the first quarter of 2000, the Company's Board of Directors approved a special executive bonus for the Company's Chief Executive Officer for past services in the form of an aircraft with a total cost to the Company of approximately $90 million, the majority of which was not tax deductible. Approximately half of the total charge was for the cost of the aircraft. The other half represents all other costs and taxes associated with the bonus. In the fourth quarter of 2002, all significant work and payments associated with the aircraft were complete. Of the original $90 million accrual, $2.4 million remained unspent at the end of fiscal 2002 and was reversed. Other Income and Expense Other income and expense for the three fiscal years ended September 28, 2002 are as follows (in millions): Gains and Losses on Non-current Investments Investments categorized as non-current debt and equity investments on the consolidated balance sheet are in equity and debt instruments of public companies. The Company's non-current debt and equity investments, and certain investments in private companies carried in other assets, have been categorized as available-for-sale requiring that they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. However, the Company recognizes an impairment charge to earnings in the event a decline in fair value below the cost basis of one of these investments is determined to be other-than-temporary. The Company includes recognized gains and losses resulting from the sale or from other-than-temporary declines in fair value associated with these investments in other income and expense. Further information related to the Company's non-current debt and equity investments may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. During 2002, the Company determined that declines in the fair value of certain of these investments were other-than-temporary. As a result, the Company recognized a $44 million charge to earnings to write-down the basis of its investment in EarthLink, Inc. (EarthLink), a $6 million charge to earnings to write-down the basis of its investment in Akamai Technologies, Inc. (Akamai), and a $15 million charge to earnings to write-down the basis of its investment in a private company investment. These losses in 2002 were partially offset by the sale of 117,000 shares of EarthLink stock for net proceeds of $2 million and a gain before taxes of $223,000, the sale of 250,000 shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of $2 million and a gain before taxes of $710,000, and the sale of approximately 4.7 million shares of ARM Holdings plc (ARM) stock for both net proceeds and a gain before taxes of $21 million. During 2001, the Company sold a total of approximately 1 million shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of $39 million and recorded a gain before taxes of $36 million, and sold a total of approximately 29.8 million shares of ARM stock for net proceeds of $176 million and recorded a gain before taxes of $174 million. These gains during 2001 were partially offset by a $114 million charge to earnings that reflected an other-than-temporary decline in the fair value of the Company's investment in EarthLink and an $8 million charge that reflected an other-than-temporary decline in the fair value of certain private company investments. During 2000, the Company sold a total of approximately 45.2 million shares of ARM stock for net proceeds of $372 million and a gain before taxes of $367 million. The combined carrying value of the Company's investments in EarthLink, Akamai, and ARM as of September 28, 2002, was $39 million. The Company believes it is likely there will continue to be significant fluctuations in the fair value of these investments in the future. Accounting for Derivatives and Cumulative Effect of Accounting Change On October 1, 2000, the Company adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standard (SFAS) No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities. SFAS No. 133 established accounting and reporting standards for derivative instruments, hedging activities, and exposure definition. Net of the related income tax effect of approximately $5 million, adoption of SFAS No. 133 resulted in a favorable cumulative-effect-type adjustment to net income of approximately $12 million for the first quarter of 2001. The $17 million gross transition adjustment was comprised of a $23 million favorable adjustment for the restatement to fair value of the derivative component of the Company's investment in Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. (Samsung), partially offset by the unfavorable adjustments to certain foreign currency and interest rate derivatives. SFAS No. 133 also required the Company to adjust the carrying value of the derivative component of its investment in Samsung to earnings during the first quarter of 2001, the before tax effect of which was an unrealized loss of approximately $13 million. Interest and Other Income, Net Net interest and other income was $112 million in fiscal 2002, compared to $217 million in fiscal 2001. This $105 million or 48% decrease is primarily the result of declining investment yields on the Company's cash and short-term investments resulting from substantially lower market interest rates. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments fell to 2.85% in 2002 compared to 5.38% in 2001. Net interest and other income increased $14 million or 7% to $217 million during 2001. The increase was due in part to interest income from higher cash and invested balances in 2001, partially offset by declining interest rates and investment yields, and a rebalancing of the aggregate investment portfolio to a higher proportion of lower risk and better credit investments. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments fell to 5.38% in 2001 compared to 6.12% in 2000. The Company expects interest and other income, net to decline substantially in 2003 as declines in interest rates continue to impact earnings on the Company's investment portfolio. The Company's expects this decline to be most pronounced in the second half of the fiscal year. The foregoing statements are forward-looking. Interest and other income, net could differ from expected levels because of several factors, including certain of those set forth below in the subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." Additionally, actual future interest and other income, net may be significantly impacted by unforeseen changes in market interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, and the fair value of the Company's short-term and long-term investments. Provision for Income Taxes The Company's effective tax rate for 2002 was 25% compared to the higher statutory rate due primarily to the research and development credit and the reversal of valuation allowances. As of September 28, 2002, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $369 million before being offset against certain deferred tax liabilities for presentation on the Company's balance sheet. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining net deferred tax assets. As of September 28, 2002, a valuation allowance of $30 million was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of tax losses that may not be realized. The valuation allowance relates principally to the operating loss carryforwards acquired from NeXT and other acquisitions, the utilization of which is subject to certain limitations imposed by the Internal Revenue Code. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has completed audits of the Company's federal income tax returns through 1997. Substantially all IRS audit issues for years through 1997 have been resolved. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In June 2001, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued SFAS No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations, which addresses financial accounting and reporting for obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement costs. The standard applies to legal obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the asset. SFAS No. 143 requires that the fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation be recognized in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. The fair value of the liability is added to the carrying amount of the associated asset and this additional carrying amount is depreciated over the life of the asset. The Company is required to adopt the provisions of SFAS No. 143 for the first quarter of its fiscal 2003. Management does not expect the adoption of SFAS No. 143 to have a material impact on the Company's financial statements. In August 2001, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued SFAS No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets (Statement 144), which supersedes both SFAS No. 121, Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to Be Disposed Of and the accounting and reporting provisions of APB Opinion No. 30 (Opinion 30), Reporting the Results of Operations-Reporting the Effects of Disposal of a Segment of a Business, and Extraordinary, Unusual and Infrequently Occurring Events and Transactions, for the disposal of a segment of a business (as previously defined in that Opinion). SFAS No. 144 retains the fundamental provisions in SFAS No. 121 for recognizing and measuring impairment losses on long-lived assets held for use and long-lived assets to be disposed of by sale, while also resolving significant implementation issues associated with SFAS No. 121. For example, SFAS No. 144 provides guidance on how a long-lived asset that is used as part of a group should be evaluated for impairment, establishes criteria for when a long-lived asset is held for sale, and prescribes the accounting for a long-lived asset that will be disposed of other than by sale. SFAS No. 144 retains the basic provisions of Opinion 30 on how to present discontinued operations in the income statement but broadens that presentation to include a component of an entity (rather than a segment of a business). Unlike SFAS No. 121, an impairment assessment under SFAS No. 144 will never result in a write-down of goodwill. Rather, goodwill is evaluated for impairment under SFAS No. No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. The Company is required to adopt the provisions of SFAS No. 144 for the first quarter of its fiscal 2003. Management does not expect the adoption of SFAS No. 144 for long-lived assets held for use to have a material impact on the Company's financial statements because the impairment assessment under SFAS No. 144 is largely unchanged from SFAS No. 121. The provisions of SFAS No. 144 for assets held for sale or other disposal generally are required to be applied prospectively after the adoption date to newly initiated disposal activities. In June 2002, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued SFAS No. 146, Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities. SFAS No. 146 supersedes Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 94-3, Liability Recognition for Certain Employee Termination Benefits and Other Costs To Exit an Activity (Including Certain Costs Associated with a Restructuring) and requires that a liability for a cost associated with an exit or disposal activity be recognized when the liability is incurred, as opposed to when management is committed to an exit plan. SFAS No. 146 also establishes that the liability should initially be measured and recorded at fair value. This Statement is effective for exit or disposal activities initiated after December 31, 2002. The provisions of SFAS No. 146 are required to be applied prospectively after the adoption date to newly initiated exit activities, and may affect the timing of recognizing future restructuring costs, as well as the amounts recognized. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions): (a)Based on ending net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period. (b)Based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each period. As of September 28, 2002, the Company had $4.337 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, virtually unchanged from the end of fiscal 2001. The primary sources of total cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments in fiscal 2002 were $89 million in cash generated by operating activities and $105 million in proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options, offset by cash utilized for business and asset acquisitions of $52 million and capital expenditures of $174 million. The Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures, stock repurchase activity, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. Lease Commitments As of September 28, 2002, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of $464 million, $209 million of which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. Remaining terms on the Company's existing operating leases range from 1 to 12 years. Subsequent to September 28, 2002, the Company entered into additional operating lease commitments for retail space with future lease commitments totaling $65 million for periods ranging from 5 to 10 years. Long-Term Debt The Company currently has long-term debt outstanding in the form of $300 million of aggregate principal amount 6.5% unsecured notes. The notes were sold at 99.925% of par, for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. The notes pay interest semiannually and mature on February 15, 2004. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company's products and to perform final assembly and test of finished products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 1 to 3 months. The Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of formal purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such formal and informal purchase commitments typically cover the Company's forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 130 days. As of September 28, 2002, the Company had outstanding third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of approximately $525 million. Capital Expenditures Of total capital expenditures in 2002 of $174 million, $106 million was for retail store facilities and equipment related to the Company's Retail segment and $68 million was for corporate infrastructure including information systems enhancements and operating facilities enhancements and expansions. The Company currently anticipates it will utilize approximately $160 million for capital expenditures during 2003, approximately $77 million of which is expected to be utilized for further expansion of the Company's Retail segment and the remainder utilized to support normal replacement of existing capital assets and enhancements to general information technology infrastructure. Stock Repurchase Plan In July 1999, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a plan for the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This repurchase plan does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. During 2002 and 2001, the Company repurchased no common shares. However, during the fourth quarter of 2001, the Company entered into a forward purchase agreement to acquire 1.5 million shares of its common stock in September of 2003 at an average price of $16.64 per share for a total cost of $25.5 million. Since inception of the repurchase plan, the Company has repurchased or committed to repurchase a total of 6.55 million shares of its common stock at a cost of $217 million. Non-Current Debt and Equity Investments The Company has held significant investments in ARM, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, Akamai, and EarthLink. These investments are reflected in the consolidated balance sheets as non-current debt and equity investments and have been categorized as available-for-sale requiring that they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. All realized gains on the sale of these investments have been included in other income. The combined fair value of these investments was $39 million, $128 million, and $786 million as of the end of fiscal 2002, 2001, and 2000, respectively. The Company believes it is likely there will continue to be significant fluctuations in the fair value of these investments in the future. Further information related to the Company's non-current debt and equity investments may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition Because of the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company's operating results and financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. General economic conditions and current economic and political uncertainty could adversely affect the Company. The Company's operating performance depends significantly on general economic conditions. For much of the past 3 years, demand for the Company's products has been negatively impacted by worsening global economic conditions. Continued uncertainty about future economic conditions continues to make it difficult to forecast future operating results. Should global and regional economic conditions fail to improve or continue to deteriorate, demand for the Company's products could continue to be adversely affected, as could the financial health of its suppliers, distributors, and resellers. The terrorist attacks that took place on September 11, 2001, disrupted commerce throughout the world and created many economic and political uncertainties that have had a strong negative impact on the global economy. The long-term effects of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the Company's future operating results and financial condition remain unknown. The national and international responses to terrorist attacks, the potential for future terrorist attacks and other acts of hostility, and the potential for war in the Middle East have created economic and political uncertainties that could adversely affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition. The market for personal computers is highly competitive. The personal computer industry is highly competitive and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, continual improvement in product price/performance characteristics, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a large number of competitors. Over the past several years, price competition in the market for personal computers has been particularly intense. The Company's competitors who sell Windows-based personal computers have aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins in order to gain or maintain market share in response to weakness in demand for personal computing products that began in the second half of calendar 2000. The Company's results of operations and financial condition have been, and in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by these and other industry-wide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross margins. The personal computer industry has also been characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality, hardware performance, and features based on existing or emerging industry standards. Further, as the personal computer industry and its customers place more reliance on the Internet, an increasing number of Internet devices that are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers may compete for market share with the Company's existing products. Several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target certain of the Company's key market segments, including consumer, education, professional and consumer digital video editing, and design and publishing. Additionally, several of the Company's competitors have introduced or announced plans to introduce products that mimic many of the unique design, technical features, and solutions of the Company's products. The Company has many substantial competitors, many of whom have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources, as well as broader product lines and larger installed customer bases than those of the Company. Additionally, there has been a trend towards consolidation in the personal computer industry that has resulted in larger and potentially stronger competitors in the Company's markets. The Company is currently the only maker of hardware using the Mac OS. The Mac OS has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers utilizing Microsoft's Windows operating systems. The Company's future operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on its ability to continue to develop improvements to the Macintosh platform in order to maintain perceived design and functional advantages over competing platforms, including Windows. The Company has higher research and development and selling, general and administrative costs, as a percentage of revenues, than many of competitors. The Company's ability to compete successfully and maintain attractive gross margins is heavily dependent upon its ability to ensure a continuing and timely flow of innovative and competitive products and technology to the marketplace. As a result, the Company incurs higher research and development costs as a percentage of revenue than its competitors who sell Windows-based personal computers. Many of these competitors seek to compete aggressively on price and maintain very low cost structures. Further, as a result of the expansion of the Company's Retail segment and costs associated with marketing the Company's brand including its unique operating system, the Company incurs higher selling costs as a percent of revenue than many of its competitors. If the Company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new products with attractive gross margins, its results of operations may be materially adversely affected by its operating cost structure. The Company must successfully manage frequent product introductions and transitions. Due to the highly volatile nature of the personal computer industry, which is characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company must continually introduce new products and technologies and enhance existing products in order to remain competitive. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance, the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with product transitions, the availability of application software for new products, the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand, and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. During 2001, the Company introduced a new client operating system, Mac OS X, and delivered its first major upgrade, Mac OS X version 10.1. During 2002, the Company delivered another major upgrade, Mac OS X Jaguar. Inability of the Company to improve the performance and functionality of Mac OS X, advance customer acceptance of the new operating system and its upgrades, or obtain the continued commitment of software developers to transition existing applications to run on Mac OS X or create new applications to run on Mac OS X, may have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and financial condition. Because orders for components, and in some cases commitments to purchase components, must be placed in advance of customer orders, the Company faces substantial inventory risk. The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products that have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees of orders for inventories that have been canceled. Although the Company believes its inventory and related provisions are adequate, given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the computer industry, no assurance can be given the Company will not incur additional inventory and related charges. In addition, such charges have had, and may again have, a material effect on the Company's financial position and results of operations. The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products. Consistent with industry practice, components are normally acquired through a combination of formal purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such formal and informal purchase commitments typically cover the Company's forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 130 days. The Company's operating results and financial condition have been in the past and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. Future operating results are dependent upon the Company's ability to obtain a sufficient supply of components, some of which are in short supply or available only from limited sources. Although most components essential to the Company's business are generally available from multiple sources, certain key components including microprocessors and application specific integrated circuits ("ASICs") are currently obtained by the Company from single or limited sources. Some key components (including without limitation DRAM, TFT-LCD flat-panel displays, and optical and magnetic disk drives), while currently available to the Company from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide availability and pricing pressures. In addition, new products introduced by the Company often initially utilize custom components obtained from only one source until the Company has evaluated whether there is a need for, and subsequently qualifies, additional suppliers. In situations where a component or product utilizes new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until such time as the suppliers' yields have matured. The Company and other producers in the personal computer industry also compete for various components with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. The Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry including certain microprocessors and ASICs. Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of components other than those customized to meet the Company's requirements. If the supply of a key component were to be delayed or constrained on a new or existing product, the Company's results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. The Company's ability to produce and market competitive products is also dependent on the ability and desire of IBM and Motorola, the sole suppliers of the PowerPC RISC-based microprocessor for the Company's Macintosh computers, to provide the Company with a sufficient supply of microprocessors with price/performance features that compare favorably to those supplied to the Company's competitors by Intel Corporation and other developers and producers of microprocessors used by personal computers using the Windows operating systems. Further, despite its efforts to educate the marketplace to the contrary, the Company believes that many of its current and potential customers believe that the relatively slower MHz rating or clock speed of the microprocessors it utilizes in its Macintosh systems compares unfavorably to those utilized by Windows-based systems and translates to slower overall system performance. There have been instances in recent years where the inability of the Company's suppliers to provide advanced G4 and G3 microprocessors with higher clock speeds in sufficient quantity has had significant adverse effects on the Company's results of operations. The inability in the future of the Company to obtain microprocessors in sufficient quantities with competitive price/performance features could have an adverse impact on the Company's results of operations and financial condition. The Company is dependent on manufacturing and logistics services provided by third parties, many of whom are located outside of the United States. Many of the Company's products are manufactured in whole or in part by third-party manufacturers. In addition, the Company has outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. While outsourcing arrangements may lower the fixed cost of operations, they also reduce the Company's direct control over production and distribution. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the products manufactured, or the flexibility of the Company to respond to changing market conditions. Moreover, although arrangements with such manufacturers may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company may remain at least initially responsible to the ultimate consumer for warranty service or in the event of product defects. Any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with contract manufacturers or otherwise, could adversely affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition. Final assembly of products sold by the Company is conducted in the Company's manufacturing facilities in Sacramento, California, and Cork, Ireland, and by external vendors in Fullerton, California, Taiwan, Korea, the People's Republic of China, and the Czech Republic. Currently, manufacture of many of the components used in the Company's products and final assembly of all of the Company's portable products including PowerBooks, iBooks, and the iPod is performed by third-party vendors in Taiwan. If for any reason manufacturing or logistics in any of these locations is disrupted by regional economic, business, environmental, political, or military conditions or events, the Company's results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. The Company's products could experience quality problems that result in decreased net sales and operating profits. The Company sells highly complex hardware and software products that may contain defects in design and manufacture. Sophisticated operating system software and applications such as the Company sells often contains "bugs" that can unexpectedly interfere with the operation of the software. Defects may also occur in components and products the Company purchases from third parties that may be beyond its control. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to detect and fix all defects in the hardware and software it sells. Failure to do so could result in lost revenues, loss of reputation, and significant expense to remedy. The Company's retail initiative requires a substantial investment and commitment of resources and is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. Since May of 2001, the Company has opened 51 retail stores in the United States and anticipates opening more stores in calendar 2003. The Company's retail initiative has required substantial investment in equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory, and personnel. The Company has also entered into substantial operating leases commitments for retail space with lease terms ranging from 5 to 12 years. The Company would incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate this initiative or close individual stores. Such costs could adversely affect the Company's results of operations and financial condition. Additionally, a relatively high proportion of the Retail segment's costs are fixed because of depreciation on store constructions costs and lease expense. As a result, should the Retail segment experience a decline in sales for any reason, significant losses would result. Certain of the Company's stores have been intentionally designed and built to serve as high profile venues that function as vehicles for general corporate marketing, corporate events, and brand awareness. Because of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores require substantially more investment in equipment and leasehold improvements than the Company's typical retail stores. The Company has opened two such stores and has several others under development. Because of their location and size, these high profile stores also require the Company to enter into substantially larger operating lease commitments compared to those required for its more typical stores. Current leases on such locations have terms ranging from 5 to 10 years with total commitments per location over the lease terms ranging from $25 million to $50 million. Closure or poor performance of one of these high profile stores could have a particularly significant negative impact on the Company's results of operations and financial condition. Many of the general risks and uncertainties the Company faces could also have an adverse impact on its Retail segment. Also, many factors unique to retail operations present risks and uncertainties, some of which are beyond the Company's control, that could adversely affect the Retail segment's future results, cause its actual results to differ from those currently expected, and/or have an adverse effect on the Company's consolidated results of operations. Potential risks and uncertainties unique to retail operations that could have an adverse impact on the Retail segment include, among other things, macro-economic factors that have a negative impact on general retail activity; inability to manage costs associated with store construction and operation; lack of consumer acceptance of the Company's retail approach; failure to attract new users to the Macintosh platform; inability to sell third-party hardware and software products at adequate margins; failure to manage relationships with existing retail channel partners; lack of experience in managing retail operations; costs associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value of Apple-branded and third-party retail inventory; and inability to obtain quality retail locations at reasonable cost. Unit sales of the Company's professionally oriented desktop systems have declined sharply over past two to three years negatively impacting net sales and gross margin. Unit sales of Power Macintosh systems fell 18% during 2002 as compared to 2001 and fell 35% in 2001 from 2000. Power Macintosh unit sales have fallen as a percentage of total Macintosh unit sales from 38% in 1999 to 25% in 2002. The Company believes that weak economic conditions over the past several years are having a pronounced negative impact on its professional and creative customers who are the primary users of such systems. The Company also believes that many of these customers continue to delay upgrades of their Power Macintosh systems due to the Company's ongoing transition to Mac OS X and in anticipation of certain software vendors transitioning their professionally oriented Macintosh software applications to run natively in Mac OS X. In addition to the negative impact on net sales, declining sales of Power Macintosh systems also have a negative effect on the Company's overall gross margin because Power Macintosh systems are generally higher priced and have higher individual gross margins than the Company's other Macintosh systems. Continued deterioration in Power Macintosh unit sales will adversely affect the Company's future net sales and gross margin. If future unit sales of Power Macintosh systems fail to partially or fully recover, it will be difficult for the Company to improve its overall profitability. The Company faces increasing competition in the U.S. education market. Sales in the United States to both elementary and secondary schools, as well as for college and university customers, remains a core market for Apple. Net sales in these markets fell to 21% of the Company's total net sales in 2002 from 26% in 2001. This drop reflects declines in both net sales and Macintosh unit sales in these markets of 15% and 14%, respectively, in fiscal 2002 compared to 2001. These developments are consistent with industry data showing the Company losing market share in the U.S. education market in each of the last two fiscal years. Several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target the education market for personal computers. Although the Company has taken certain steps to strengthen its position in the education market, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to increase its share of the education market or maintain its existing share of that market. Failure to increase or maintain market share in the education market may have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and financial condition. The Company's future operating performance is dependent on the performance of distributors and other resellers of the Company's products. The Company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers and cataloguers, many of whom distribute products from competing manufacturers. In addition, the Company also sells many of its products and resells certain third-party products in most of its major markets directly to end users, certain education customers, and certain resellers through its online stores around the world. The Company also sells its own products and certain third-party products through its retail stores in the United States. Many of the Company's significant resellers operate on narrow product margins and have been negatively affected by current economic conditions. Considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company's distribution and retail channel partners. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakened, if resellers within consumer channels were to cease distribution of the Company's products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the Company's products caused resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company's products. Further information regarding risks associated with Marketing and Distribution may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Markets and Distribution," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. The Company's business is subject to the risks of international operations. A large portion of the Company's revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company's operating results and financial condition could be significantly affected by risks associated with international activities, including economic and labor conditions, political instability, tax laws (including U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiaries), and changes in the value of the U.S. dollar versus the local currency in which the products are sold and goods and services are purchased. Historically, the Company's primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relate to non-dollar denominated sales in Europe, Japan, Australia, Canada, and certain parts of Asia and non-dollar denominated operating expenses incurred throughout the world. Weaknesses in foreign currencies, particularly the Japanese Yen and the Euro, can adversely impact consumer demand for the Company's products and the U.S. dollar value of the Company's foreign currency denominated sales. Conversely, strengthening in these and other foreign currencies can increase the cost to the Company of product components, negatively affecting the Company's results of operations. Margins on sales of Apple products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties. Further information related to the Company's global market risks may be found in Part II, Item 7A ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The Company's actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition" below. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following table sets forth annual results of operations for fiscal years 2000, 1999, and 1998 (in millions, except unit shipment and per share amounts): The following table sets forth quarterly results of operations for fiscal 2000 and 1999 (in millions, except unit sales and per share amounts): FISCAL 2000 OVERVIEW SALES During 2000, the Company experienced a 30% increase in net sales over 1999 which was the result of a 32% rise in Macintosh unit sales. This increase in Macintosh unit sales is primarily attributable to increased sales of iMac, the company's moderately priced desktop Macintosh system designed for the education and consumer markets, and the introduction of iBook, the Company's consumer and education oriented notebook computer introduced at the end of 1999. The Company sold approximately 2.2 million iMacs in 2000, an increase of approximately 400,000 units or 22% over iMac unit sales in 1999. During 2000, the Company sold approximately 545,000 iBooks. iBook contributed $809 million to net sales during 2000. The Company also experienced modest gains in combined unit sales of its professionally oriented Macintosh systems, PowerMacs and PowerBooks. Growth in net sales and unit sales was strong in all of the Company's geographic operating segments, particularly in Europe and Japan. PROFITABILITY The Company experienced improved profitability in 2000. Operating income before special charges rose 61% to $620 million in 2000 from $386 million in 1999. Improved profitability was driven by the 30% increase in net sales, stable overall gross margins in 2000 as compared to 1999, and a relatively modest increase in operating expenses before special charges of 18%. OPERATING TRENDS Despite overall increases during 2000 in net sales, unit sales, and profitability, the Company's performance in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2000 was disappointing. Net sales during the fourth quarter fell short of the Company's expectations by approximately $180 million causing operating margin before special charges to fall to 4% for the quarter as compared to the 9% experienced during the first nine months of fiscal 2000. The fourth quarter revenue shortfall was primarily the result of three factors. First, fourth quarter net sales of the G4 Cube, a new Macintosh system announced and introduced by the Company during the fourth quarter, did not meet the Company's expectations. In combination with related displays, G4 Cube sales were approximately $90 million short of expectations. Second, net sales in the Company's education market fell short of expectations by approximately $60 million. Third, although total fourth quarter Power Mac unit sales were close to expectations, the Company experienced an unanticipated mix shift towards lower priced Power Mac configurations resulting in lower than anticipated net sales for the quarter of approximately $30 million. The Company ended 2000 with substantially more inventory in its distribution channels than planned due to the lower than expected sell-through of the Company's products during the fourth quarter. OUTLOOK The Company currently anticipates a significant sequential decline in quarterly net sales during the first quarter of fiscal 2001 to approximately $1.0 billion. This decline is anticipated because of a continued deterioration in demand experienced by the Company during the first two months of fiscal 2001, rebate programs and price cuts instituted during the first quarter that will cost the Company approximately $135 million, and a plan to reduce substantially by the end of the first quarter the level of inventory in the Company's distribution channels from the amounts at the end of fiscal 2000. In addition, the Company expects to incur approximately $115 million of cancellation charges related to purchase orders for proprietary components due to the reduced sales outlook. As a result of these factors, the Company anticipates reporting a net loss, before the effect of any investment gains, in the range of $225 million to $250 million for the first quarter of 2001. For all of 2001, the Company anticipates net sales will decline as compared to 2000, falling in the range of $6.0 billion to $6.5 billion. The Company currently expects that it will be profitable, before the effect of any investment gains, during each of the last three quarters of 2001. The foregoing statements concerning the Company's anticipated operating results during the first quarter of 2001 and the Company's anticipated operating result for all of 2001 are forward-looking. The Company's actual results could differ. The Company's future operating results and financial condition are dependent upon general economic conditions, market conditions within the PC industry, and the Company's ability to successfully develop, manufacture, and market technologically innovative products in order to meet the dynamic conditions within the highly competitive market for personal computers. Some of the potential risks and uncertainties that could affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition are discussed throughout this Item 7, including the discussion under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." NET SALES Net sales for geographic segments and Macintosh unit sales by geographic segment and by product follow (net sales in millions and Macintosh unit sales in thousands): - ------------------------ (a) Unit sales figures for iMac in 1998 include sales of the Company's previous consumer and education oriented Macintosh products. Net sales rose 30% to a total of $7.983 billion in 2000 as compared to 1999. The increase in net sales resulted directly from a 32% increase in Macintosh unit sales. Driving unit sales growth was a 51% increase in combined unit sales of the Company's consumer and education Macintosh systems, iMac and iBook, and a modest increase of 11% in combined units sales of the Company's professionally oriented Macintosh systems. Combined unit sales of iMac and iBook systems accounted for 52% of total Macintosh unit sales in 1999 and 60% in 2000. This trend highlights the increasing importance to the Company of its consumer and education markets. During 2000, the average revenue per Macintosh system, a function of total net sales generated by hardware shipments and total Macintosh CPU unit sales, of $1,715 was relatively unchanged from 1999. This was due to increased unit sales of higher priced Power Mac, PowerBook, iBook, and G4 Cube systems offset by increases in unit sales of lower priced iMac systems. Additional comments regarding net sales for 2000 may be found above under the heading "Fiscal 2000 Overview." Net sales increased $193 million or 3% to $6.134 billion in 1999 compared to 1998. The primary source of this growth was an overall 25% increase in Macintosh unit sales, which was reflective of strong unit growth in all of the Company's geographic operating segments. Offsetting the rise in unit shipments during 1999 was a decline in the average revenue per Macintosh system which fell 17% to $1,739 from $2,095 in 1998. The decline during 1999 in the average revenue per Macintosh system was attributable to lower pricing for both iMac and Power Mac products, which reflects the continuing overall industry trend towards lower pricing. The decline was also attributable to the shift in the Company's unit mix toward lower-priced consumer products such that iMac units and comparable products comprised 52% of total Macintosh unit sales in 1999 versus 39% in 1998. Net sales declined sequentially during the fourth quarter of 1999 compared to the third quarter by $222 million or 14%, and declined $220 million or 14% compared to the same period in 1998. Similarly, Macintosh unit sales declined 15% and 7% during the fourth quarter of 1999 compared to the third quarter of 1999 and the same period in 1998, respectively. The primary causes for these declines in both net sales and unit sales were lower than planned deliveries of PowerPC G4 processors from Motorola and production interruptions at vendors supplying PowerBooks and iBooks experienced during the last week of the fourth quarter of 1999 as a result of the earthquake in Taiwan on September 20, 1999. The shortage of G4 processors reduced Power Macintosh net sales by approximately $200 million during the fourth quarter of 1999. SEGMENT OPERATING PERFORMANCE The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company's geographic segments include the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Asia Pacific. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The European segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Japan segment includes only Japan, while the Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and Asia except for Japan. Each geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company's operating segments may be found in Part II, Item 8 on this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 10, "Segment Information and Geographic Data," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. AMERICAS Net sales and unit sales in the Americas segment increased 22% and 24%, respectively, during 2000 as compared to 1999. During 2000, the Americas segment represented approximately 54% and 55% of the Company's total net sales and total Macintosh unit sales, respectively. The growth of the Americas' net sales in 2000 was indicative of strong growth in unit sales of iMac and iBook and relatively flat unit sales of professionally oriented Macintosh systems. Net sales in the Americas segment increased 2% to $3.527 billion during 1999 as compared to 1998, while Macintosh unit sales increased 22%. This followed a 5% decline in net sales in the Americas between 1998 and 1997. During 1999, the Americas segment represented approximately 57% and 59% of the Company's total net sales and total Macintosh unit sales, respectively. The results experienced by this segment in 1999 reflect the overall trends experienced by the Company during 1999 of increasing Macintosh unit sales offset by declines in the average revenue per Macintosh system. EUROPE Net sales in the Europe segment increased 38% during 2000 driven by a 53% increase in Macintosh unit sales. Growth in unit sales resulted from a 96% increase in combined unit sales of iMac and iBook, and an increase of 19% in combined units sales of the Company's professionally oriented Macintosh systems. Net sales in the Europe segment increased 2% to $1.317 billion during 1999 as compared to 1998, while Macintosh unit sales increased 23%. This followed a 16% decline in net sales in the Europe segment between 1998 and 1997. Like the Americas segment, Europe's results in 1999 as compared to 1998 were indicative of strong growth in Macintosh unit sales offset by declines in the average revenue per Macintosh system. JAPAN AND ASIA PACIFIC Net sales in the Japan segment increased 57% to $1.345 billion in 2000 as compared to 1999, while Japan's Macintosh unit sales increased 39%. The fact that Japan's net sales rose at a higher rate than its unit sales reflects several factors. First, iMac unit sales in Japan were relatively flat year-over-year. Second, unit sales of iBook, which generally carry a higher price than iMac units and which were first sold in Japan during 2000, accounted for approximately 17% of Japan's total Macintosh unit sales during 2000. Third, Japan saw a 43% increase in combined unit sales of the Company's professionally oriented Macintosh systems. The majority of the increase in both net sales and unit sales in the Asia Pacific segment can be attributed to sales of the G4 Cube and iBook, both of which were introduced in the region during 2000. Macintosh unit sales and net sales in Asia, particularly in Japan, recovered during 1999 from the declines experienced in 1998. Net sales in the Japan segment increased 17% or $127 million to a total of $858 million in 1999 as compared to 1998. Macintosh unit sales in Japan increased 35% during 1999 compared to 1998 while Macintosh unit sales in the Asia Pacific segment increased 37%. The increases in net sales and Macintosh unit sales in both Japan and Asia Pacific are the result of strong iMac sales experienced by these operating segments, strong growth in Japanese consumer sales, and the general economic recovery experienced in the region. BACKLOG In the Company's experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following new product introductions because of over-ordering by dealers anticipating shortages. Backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company's ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance. Further information regarding the Company's backlog may be found below under the subheading "Product Introductions and Transitions" included under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. GROSS MARGIN Gross margin was relatively stable during 2000 as compared to 1999, declining to 27.1% during 2000 from 27.6% during 1999. The half point decline is primarily the result of a shift in mix of unit sales away from the Company's higher priced, higher margin professionally oriented Macintosh systems towards its lower priced, lower margin consumer and education oriented Macintosh systems. Also contributing to the relative stability of its gross margin, the Company experienced relatively stable component pricing during 2000 as compared to 1999. Gross margin increased as a percentage of net sales during 1999 to 27.6% as compared to 24.9% in 1998. This increase was primarily attributable to declines in the cost of various components of the Company's products, improvements in manufacturing efficiencies brought about by selective outsourcing of final assembly of certain of the Company's products, improved design of products leading to lower manufacturing and warranty costs, and relatively stable pricing of the Company's products over the last six months of 1999. During 1999, the Company was also able to fully realize the benefits of actions taken primarily in 1998 and 1997 that led to improved inventory management and a more efficient distribution model for its products. There can be no assurance current gross margins will be maintained, targeted gross margin levels will be achieved, or current margins on existing individual products will be maintained. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services, and potential changes to the Company's product mix, including higher unit sales of consumer products with lower average selling prices and lower gross margins. In response to these downward pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company's ability to effectively manage quality problems and warranty costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. The Company's operating strategy and pricing take into account anticipated changes in foreign currency exchange rates over time; however, the Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short term by fluctuations in exchange rates. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT The Company recognizes focused investments in research and development are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company's core business strategy. Expenditures on research and development increased 21% or $66 million to $380 million in 2000 as compared to 1999. This followed a $11 million or 4% increase in 1999 as compared to 1998. Spending on R&D has remained at approximately 5% of net sales during each of the last three years. The overall increase in R&D spending over the last two years is directly related to increases in R&D headcount of approximately 13% over that time to support expanded product development efforts. SELLING, GENERAL, AND ADMINISTRATIVE Selling, general, and administrative expenditures increased 17% to $1,166 million in 2000 as compared to 1999 and decreased to 15% of net sales in 2000 from 16% in 1999. This increase in total expenditures resulted from higher spending for promotional and marketing activities, increased sales expenses resulting from higher net sales, and a 21% increase in combined sales, marketing, and general and administrative headcount from the end of 1999 to the end of 2000. Selling, general, and administrative expenditures increased 10% to $996 million in 1999 as compared to 1998 and increased to 16% of net sales in 1999 from 15% in 1998. These increases are primarily the result of increased spending on marketing and promotional activities throughout 1999 and a 12% increase in combined sales, marketing, and general and administrative headcount from the end of 1998 to the end of 1999. SPECIAL CHARGES 2000 RESTRUCTURING ACTIONS During the first quarter of 2000, the Company initiated restructuring actions resulting in recognition of an $8 million restructuring charge. This charge was comprised of $3 million for the write-off of various operating assets and $5 million for severance payments to approximately 95 employees associated with consolidation of various domestic and international sales and marketing functions. 1999 RESTRUCTURING ACTIONS During the fourth quarter of 1999, the Company initiated restructuring actions resulting in a charge to operations of $21 million. The net restructuring charge of $18 million recognized during the fourth quarter of 1999 reflects $3 million of excess reserves related to prior restructuring actions. The $21 million cost of these actions was comprised of $11 million for contract cancellation charges associated with the closure of the Company's outsourced data center and $10 million for contract cancellation charges related to supply and development agreements previously discontinued. During the second quarter of 1999, the Company took certain actions to improve the flexibility and efficiency of its manufacturing operations by moving final assembly of certain of its products to third-party manufacturers. These restructuring actions resulted in the Company recognizing a charge to operations of approximately $9 million during the second quarter of 1999. The charge was comprised of $6 million for severance benefits to be paid to employees involuntarily terminated, $2 million for the write-down of operating assets to be disposed of, and $1 million for payments on canceled contracts. These actions resulted in the termination of approximately 580 employees. EXECUTIVE BONUS During the first quarter of 2000, the Company's Board of Directors approved a special executive bonus for the Company's Chief Executive Officer for past services in the form of an aircraft with a total cost to the Company of approximately $90 million, the majority of which is not tax deductible. Approximately half of the total charge is the cost of the aircraft. The other half represents all other costs and taxes associated with the bonus. INTEREST AND OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NET Net interest income increased $116 million or 133% to $203 million during 2000 as compared to 1999. This increase is attributable to three principal factors. First, the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased $801 million or 25% during 2000. Second, the weighted-average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash equivalents and short-term investments increased to 6.55% as of the end of 2000 compared to 5.38% at the end of 1999. The combination of these first two factors increased interest income during 2000 by $66 million. Third, interest expense declined $26 million during 2000 as a result of the conversion of approximately $661 million of the Company's convertible subordinated notes to common stock during the third quarter of 1999. During 1999, the Company experienced a $59 million increase in net interest income, primarily the result of higher cash and investment balances, and by decreased interest expense associated with the conversion of the convertible subordinated notes during the third quarter of 1999. GAIN FROM SALE OF INVESTMENT The Company holds a significant equity investment in ARM Holdings plc (ARM), a publicly held company in the United Kingdom involved in the design and licensing of high performance microprocessors and related technology. As of September 30, 2000, the Company holds 34.8 million shares of ARM stock valued at $383 million. During 2000, the Company sold a total of 45.2 million shares of ARM stock for net proceeds of approximately $372 million, recorded a gain before taxes of approximately $367 million, and recognized related income tax of approximately $94 million. During 1999, the Company sold a total of 163 million shares of ARM stock for net proceeds of approximately $245 million, recorded a gain before taxes of approximately $230 million, and recognized related income tax of approximately $25 million. During 1998, ARM completed an initial public offering of its stock on the London Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ National Market. The Company sold 18.9% of the shares it held in ARM at that time for a gain before foreign taxes of approximately $24 million. The Company also recognized during 1998 other income of approximately $16 million to reflect its remaining 25.9% ownership interest in the increased net book value of ARM following its initial public offering. Further information related to the Company's investment in ARM and gains recognized related to that investment may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which information is hereby incorporated by reference. PROVISION FOR INCOME TAXES As of September 30, 2000, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $466 million before being offset against certain deferred tax liabilities for presentation on the Company's balance sheet. This asset is generally realizable based on the ability to offset existing deferred tax liabilities. As of September 30, 2000, a valuation allowance of $33 million was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of tax losses that may not be realized. The valuation allowance relates principally to the operating loss carryforwards acquired from NeXT, the utilization of which is subject to certain limitations imposed by the Internal Revenue Code. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. The Company's effective tax rate for 2000 was 28% compared to the higher statutory rate due primarily to the reversal of a portion of the previously established valuation allowance and certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes were provided. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has proposed federal income tax deficiencies for the years 1984 through 1991, and the Company has made certain prepayments thereon. The Company contested the proposed deficiencies by filing petitions with the United States Tax Court, and most of the issues in dispute have now been resolved. On June 30, 1997, the IRS proposed income tax adjustments for the years 1992 through 1994. Although most of the issues for these years have been resolved, certain issues still remain in dispute and are being contested by the Company. Management believes adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS In June 1998, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 133, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities" was issued. SFAS No. 133 establishes accounting and reporting standards for derivative instruments, hedging activities, and exposure definition. SFAS No. 133 requires an entity to recognize all derivatives as either assets or liabilities in the statement of financial position and measure those instruments at fair value. Derivatives that are not hedges must be adjusted to fair value through income. If the derivative is a hedge, depending on the nature of the hedge, changes in fair value will either be offset against the change in fair value of the hedged assets, liabilities, or firm commitments through earnings, or recognized in other comprehensive income until the hedged item is recognized in earnings. In June 1999, SFAS No. 137, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities--Deferral of the Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 133," was issued. The statement deferred the effective date of SFAS No. 133 until the first quarter of fiscal 2001. The Company will adopt SFAS No. 133, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities," as of October 1, 2000. Net of the related income tax effect, the adoption of SFAS No. 133 is expected to have a favorable cumulative-effect-type adjustment to net income of approximately $12 million and a favorable cumulative-effect-type adjustment to other comprehensive income of $15 million. Management does not believe that adoption of SFAS No. 133 will significantly alter the Company's hedging strategies. However, its application may increase the volatility of other income and expense and other comprehensive income. In December 1999, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 101, "Revenue Recognition in Financial Statements." SAB 101, as amended, summarizes certain of the SEC's views in applying generally accepted accounting principles to revenue recognition in financial statements and provides guidance on revenue recognition issues in the absence of authoritative literature addressing a specific arrangement or a specific industry. The Company will adopt SAB 101 in the first quarter of fiscal year 2001. Adoption of this guidance is not expected to have a material impact on the Company's financial position or results of operations. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES The following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions): - ------------------------ (a) Based on ending net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period. (b) Based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each period. As of September 30, 2000, the Company had $4.027 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, an increase of $801 million or 25% over the same balances at the end of 1999. During 2000, the Company's primary source of cash was $826 million in cash flows from operating activities. Cash generated by operations was primarily from net income and increases in accounts payable and other current liabilities partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable. The Company's cash and cash equivalent balances as of September 30, 2000 and September 25, 1999 include $7 million and $4 million, respectively, pledged primarily as collateral against outstanding derivative positions. In addition to the net purchase of short-term investments of $936 million, net cash used by investing activities consisted primarily of $232 million for the purchase of long-term investments, including $200 million invested in EarthLink Network, Inc. (EarthLink) discussed below, and $107 million for the purchase of fixed assets. These uses of cash were partially offset by proceeds from sales of ARM shares of $372 million. The Company currently expects capital expenditures to increase to approximately $225 million during 2001 to accommodate information systems enhancements and strategic initiatives. In July 1999, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a plan for the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This repurchase plan does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. During 2000, the Company repurchased a total of 2.55 million shares of its common stock at a cost of $116 million. Since inception of the plan, the Company has repurchased a total of 5.05 million shares of its common stock at a cost of $191 million. The Company believes its balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to meet its cash requirements over the next twelve months, including any cash utilized by its stock repurchase plan. However, given the Company's current non-investment grade debt ratings (Standard and Poor's Rating Agency of BB and Moody's Investor Services of Ba2), if the Company should need to obtain short-term borrowings, there can be no assurance such borrowings could be obtained at favorable rates. The inability to obtain such borrowings at favorable rates could materially adversely affect the Company's results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity. NON-CURRENT DEBT AND EQUITY INVESTMENTS The Company holds significant investments in ARM, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd, Akamai Technologies, Inc., and EarthLink. These investments are reflected in the consolidated balance sheets as non-current debt and equity investments and have been categorized as available-for-sale requiring that they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. All realized gains on the sale of these investments have been included in other income. The combined fair value of these investments was $786 million and $339 million as of September 30, 2000, and September 25, 1999, respectively. The Company believes it is likely there will continue to be significant fluctuations in the fair value of these investments in the future. Further information related to the Company's non-current debt and equity investments may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which information is hereby incorporated by reference. FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE RESULTS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION Because of the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company's operating results and financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. COMPETITION The personal computer industry is highly competitive and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, continual improvement in product price/performance characteristics, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a large number of competitors. The Company's results of operations and financial condition have been, and in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by industry wide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross margins. The personal computer industry has also been characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality, hardware performance, and features based on existing or emerging industry standards. Further, as the personal computer industry and its customers place more reliance on the Internet, an increasing number of Internet devices that are smaller and simpler than traditional personal computers may compete for market share with the Company's existing products. Several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target certain of the Company's key market segments, including consumer, education, and design and publishing. Additionally, several of the Company's competitors have introduced or announced plans to introduce products that mimic many of the unique design, technical features, and solutions of the Company's products. Many of the Company's competitors have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources, as well as broader product lines and larger installed customer bases than those of the Company. Additionally, the Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by overall demand for personal computers and general customer preferences for one platform over another or one set of product features over another. The Company is currently the only maker of hardware using the Mac OS. The Mac OS has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers utilizing Microsoft Windows operating systems. The Company's future operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on its ability to continue to develop improvements to the Macintosh platform in order to maintain perceived design and functional advantages over competing platforms. PRODUCT INTRODUCTIONS AND TRANSITIONS Due to the highly volatile nature of the personal computer industry, which is characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company must continually introduce new products and technologies and enhance existing products in order to remain competitive. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance, the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with product transitions, the availability of application software for new products, the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand, and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. During 2001, the Company plans to introduce a new client operating system, Mac OS X, which will offer advanced functionality based on Apple and NeXT software technologies. Inability to successfully introduce Mac OS X on a timely basis, gain customer acceptance, obtain the commitment of developers to transition existing applications to run on Mac OS X, or ensure adequate backward-compatibility of Mac OS X with applications authored for previous version of the Mac OS, may have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and financial condition. INVENTORY AND SUPPLY The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products that have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value and accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees of orders for inventories that have been canceled. Although the Company believes its inventory and related provisions are adequate, given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the computer industry, no assurance can be given the Company will not incur additional inventory and related charges. In addition, such charges have had, and may again have, a material effect on the Company's financial position and results of operations. The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products. Consistent with industry practice, components are normally acquired through purchase orders typically covering the Company's requirements for periods from 30 to 130 days. The Company's operating results and financial condition have been in the past and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. The Company ended 2000 with substantially more inventory in its distribution channels than planned due to the lower than expected sell-through of the Company's products during the fourth quarter. The Company currently anticipates a significant sequential decline in quarterly net sales during the first quarter of fiscal 2001, in part due to the Company's plan to reduce substantially the level of inventory in its distribution channels from the amounts at the end of fiscal 2000 to more normal levels by the end of the first quarter. Many of the Company's products are manufactured in whole or in part by third-party manufacturers. In addition, the Company has outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. While outsourcing arrangements may lower the fixed cost of operations, they also reduce the Company's direct control over production and distribution. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the products manufactured, or the flexibility of the Company to respond to changing market conditions. Moreover, although arrangements with such manufacturers may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company may remain at least initially responsible to the ultimate consumer for warranty service or in the event of product defects. Any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with contract manufacturers or otherwise, could adversely affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition. Although certain components essential to the Company's business are generally available from multiple sources, other key components (including microprocessors and application specific integrated circuits ("ASICs")) are currently obtained by the Company from single or limited sources. Some other key components (including without limitation DRAM, TFT-LCD flat-panel displays, and optical and magnetic disk drives), while currently available to the Company from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry wide availability and pricing pressures. In addition, new products introduced by the Company often initially utilize custom components obtained from only one source until the Company has evaluated whether there is a need for and subsequently qualifies additional suppliers. In situations where a component or product utilizes new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until such time as the suppliers' yields have matured. The Company and other producers in the personal computer industry also compete for various components with other industries (such as the cellular phone and automotive industries) that have experienced increased demand for their products. The Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry (including certain microprocessors and ASICs). Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of components other than those customized to meet the Company's requirements. If the supply of a key component were to be delayed or constrained on a new or existing product, the Company's results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected, depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or, if possible, to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from an alternate source. The Company's ability to produce and market competitive products is also dependent on the ability and desire of IBM and Motorola, the sole suppliers of the PowerPC RISC-based microprocessor for the Company's Macintosh computers, to provide the Company with a sufficient supply of microprocessors with price/performance features that compare favorably to those supplied to the Company's competitors by Intel Corporation, and other developers and producers of microprocessors used by personal computers using the Windows operating systems. Apple has been unable to ship Macintosh systems with PowerPC G4 microprocessors running above 500 megahertz since such systems were first announced in August of 1999 due to its G4 microprocessor supplier's inability to provide the Company with faster G4 microprocessors. Similar but less pronounced supply issues have also arisen with the Company's supply of faster PowerPC G3 microprocessors. The Company believes that this inability to obtain faster microprocessors had an adverse impact on the Company's results of operations during 2000, particularly towards the end of the fiscal year. The Company has been informed by its suppliers that faster microprocessors will be available in sufficient quantity beginning in the first half of calendar 2001. However, no assurance can be given that such faster microprocessors will actually be available or be available in sufficient quantities, and the inability of the Company to obtain faster microprocessors in sufficient quantities during 2001 may have an adverse impact on the Company's results of operations and financial condition. Further discussion relating to availability and supply of components and product may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Raw Materials," and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 9 under the subheading "Concentrations in the Available Sources of Supply of Materials and Product," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. EDUCATION MARKET Several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target the education market for personal computers. As a result, the Company's overall share of this market has declined. Additionally, net sales in the Company's education market fell short of expectations by approximately $60 million during the fourth quarter of 2000, primarily as a result of the Company's transition to a more direct sales model from a model heavily dependent on third party sales agents. Although the Company has initiated a plan to strengthen its position in the education market, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to increase its share of the education market or maintain its existing share of that market. Failure to increase or maintain market share in the education market may have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and financial condition. MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION The Company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers and cataloguers. In addition, the Company also sells many of its products and resells certain third-party products in most of its major markets to consumers, certain education customers, and certain resellers either directly or through its on-line stores around the world. Many of the Company's significant resellers operate on narrow product margins, and may distribute products from competing manufacturers. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakened, if resellers within consumer channels were to cease distribution of the Company's products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the Company's products caused resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company's products. Further information regarding risks associated with Marketing and Distribution may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Markets and Distribution," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. GLOBAL MARKET RISKS A large portion of the Company's revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company's operating results and financial condition could be significantly affected by risks associated with international activities, including economic and labor conditions, political instability, tax laws (including U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiaries), and changes in the value of the U.S. dollar versus the local currency in which the products are sold and goods and services are purchased. Historically, the Company's primary exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates relate to non-dollar denominated sales in Europe, Japan, Australia, Canada, and certain parts of Asia and non-dollar denominated operating expenses incurred throughout the world. Weaknesses in foreign currencies, particularly the Japanese Yen and the Euro, can adversely impact consumer demand for the Company's products and the U.S. dollar value of the Company's foreign currency denominated sales. Conversely, strengthening in these and other foreign currencies can effect the cost to the Company of product components, negatively impacting the Company's results of operations. Further information related to the Company's global market risks may be found in Part II, Item 7A ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS THIS SECTION AND OTHER PARTS OF THIS FORM 10-K CONTAIN FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS THAT INVOLVE RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES. THE COMPANY'S ACTUAL RESULTS MAY DIFFER SIGNIFICANTLY FROM THE RESULTS DISCUSSED IN THE FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS. FACTORS THAT MIGHT CAUSE SUCH DIFFERENCES INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT LIMITED TO, THOSE DISCUSSED IN THE SUBSECTION ENTITLED "FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE RESULTS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION" BELOW. THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION SHOULD BE READ IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND NOTES THERETO INCLUDED IN ITEM 8 OF THIS FORM 10-K. ALL INFORMATION IS BASED ON THE COMPANY'S FISCAL CALENDAR. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following table sets forth annual results of operations for fiscal years 1999, 1998, and 1997 (in millions, except unit shipment and per share amounts): The following table sets forth quarterly results of operations for fiscal 1999 and 1998 (in millions, except unit shipment and per share amounts): OVERVIEW During 1999, the Company experienced a 25% rise in Macintosh unit sales. This increase is primarily attributable to the success of iMac, the Company's moderately priced desktop Macintosh system designed for the education and consumer markets. The Company sold approximately 1.8 million iMac units in 1999, an increase of approximately 730,000 units or 68% over unit sales of similar products in 1998. Growth in unit sales was strong in all of the Company's geographic operating segments, particularly in Japan and Asia Pacific due to strong acceptance of iMac in those regions and the general economic improvements experienced in much of Asia during the year. The Company also experienced improved profitability in 1999. Operating income before special charges rose 44% or $118 million to $386 million in 1999 from $268 million in 1998. Contributing to the improvement in operating margin in 1999 was a rise in gross margin as a percentage of net sales to 28% as compared to 25% in 1998. The impact of improved gross margins was partially offset by planned increases in recurring operating expenses during 1999 of 8% to a total of $1.337 billion. Despite improved unit sales and improved profitability, the Company's net sales rose only 3% in 1999 to $6.134 billion. Growth in net sales was negatively impacted during the year by declines in the average revenue per Macintosh system for both Power Macintosh and iMac systems and by a shift in unit mix towards the lower priced iMac systems. Net sales were also negatively impacted during the fourth quarter of 1999 due to lower than planned deliveries of PowerPC G4 processors from Motorola. The primary focus of the Company during fiscal 2000 remains achieving meaningful year-over-year growth in both unit sales and net sales. The Company's future operating results and financial condition are dependent upon the Company's ability to successfully develop, manufacture, and market technologically innovative products in order to meet the dynamic conditions within the highly competitive market for personal computers. Potential risks and uncertainties that could affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition are discussed throughout this Item 7, including the discussion under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." NET SALES Net sales for geographic segments and Macintosh unit sales by geographic segment and by product follow (net sales in millions and Macintosh unit sales in thousands): - ------------------------ (a) Unit sales figures for iMac in 1998 and 1997 include sales of the Company's previous consumer and education oriented Macintosh products. Net sales increased $193 million or 3% to $6.134 billion in 1999 compared to 1998. The primary source of this growth was an overall 25% increase in Macintosh unit sales, which was reflective of strong unit growth in all of the Company's geographic operating segments. Offsetting the rise in unit shipments was a decline in the average revenue per Macintosh system, a function of total net sales generated by hardware shipments and total Macintosh CPU unit sales, which fell 17% to $1,739 from $2,095 in 1998. The decline during 1999 in the average revenue per Macintosh system is attributable to lower pricing for both iMac and Power Macintosh products, which reflects the continuing overall industry trend towards lower pricing. The decline is also attributable to the shift in the Company's unit mix toward lower-priced consumer products such that iMac units and comparable products comprised 52% of total Macintosh unit sales in 1999 versus 39% in 1998. Net sales declined sequentially during the fourth quarter of 1999 compared to the third quarter by $222 million or 14%, and declined $220 million or 14% compared to the same period in 1998. Similarly, Macintosh unit sales declined 15% and 7% during the fourth quarter of 1999 compared to the third quarter of 1999 and the same period in 1998, respectively. The primary causes for these declines in both net sales and unit sales were lower than planned deliveries of PowerPC G4 processors from Motorola and production interruptions at vendors supplying PowerBooks and iBooks experienced during the last week of the fourth quarter of 1999 as a result of the earthquake in Taiwan on September 20, 1999. The shortage of G4 processors reduced net sales by approximately $200 million during the fourth quarter of 1999. Net sales decreased $1.140 billion, or 16%, to $5.941 billion in 1998 compared to 1997. The decline during 1998 in net sales is attributable to several factors. The Company experienced a $454 million decrease in net sales of peripheral products during 1998 compared to 1997 principally due to the discontinuance by the Company of certain imaging and display products. The average revenue per Macintosh system fell 11% during 1998 as compared to 1997 from $2,375 to $2,095, reflecting the effect of aggressive pricing of the Company's Power Macintosh G3 systems introduced in the first quarter of fiscal 1998, the decline in net sales from the phase out of certain peripheral products, the overall industry trend toward lower priced products, and the Company's reentry during the fourth quarter of 1998 into the lower-priced consumer market. Lastly, overall Macintosh CPU unit sales for 1998 declined approximately 4% from 1997. International net sales were particularly affected by these factors and by the economic conditions existing in Asia during 1998. SEGMENT OPERATING PERFORMANCE The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company's geographic segments include the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Asia Pacific. The Americas segment includes both North and South America. The European segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Japan segment includes only Japan, while the Asia Pacific segment includes Australia and Asia except for Japan. Each geographic operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company's operating segments may be found in Part II, Item 8 on this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 9, "Segment Information and Geographic Data," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. AMERICAS Net sales in the Americas segment increased 2% to $3.527 billion during 1999 as compared to 1998, while Macintosh unit sales increased 22%. This followed a 5% decline in net sales in the Americas between 1998 and 1997. During 1999, the Americas segment represented approximately 57% and 59% of the Company's total net sales and total Macintosh unit sales, respectively. The results experienced by this segment in 1999 reflect the overall trends experienced by the Company of growing Macintosh unit sales offset by declines in the average revenue per Macintosh system. EUROPE Net sales in the Europe segment increased 2% to $1.317 billion during 1999 as compared to 1998, while Macintosh unit sales increased 23%. This followed a 16% decline in net sales in the Europe segment between 1998 and 1997. Like the Americas segment, Europe's results in 1999 as compared to 1998 are indicative of strong growth in Macintosh unit sales offset by declines in the average revenue per Macintosh system. JAPAN AND ASIA PACIFIC Macintosh unit sales and net sales in Asia, particularly in Japan, recovered during 1999 from the declines experienced in 1998. Net sales in the Japan segment increased 17% or $127 million to a total of $858 million in 1999 as compared to 1998. Macintosh unit sales in Japan increased 35% during 1999 compared to 1998 while Macintosh unit sales in the Asia Pacific segment increased 37%. The increases in net sales and Macintosh unit sales in both Japan and Asia Pacific are the result of strong iMac sales experienced by these operating segments, strong growth in Japanese consumer sales, and the general economic recovery experienced in the region. BACKLOG In the Company's experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following new product introductions because of overordering by dealers anticipating shortages. Backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company's ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance. Further information regarding the Company's backlog may be found below under the subheading "Product Introductions and Transitions" included under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. GROSS MARGIN Gross margin increased as a percentage of net sales during 1999 to 28% as compared to 25% in 1998. This increase was primarily attributable to declines in the cost of various components of the Company's products, improvements in manufacturing efficiencies brought about by selective outsourcing of final assembly of certain of the Company's products, improved design of products leading to lower manufacturing and warranty costs, and relatively stable pricing of the Company's products over the last six months of 1999. During 1999, the Company was also able to fully realize the benefits of actions taken primarily in 1998 and 1997 that led to improved inventory management and a more efficient distribution model for its products. These improvements are discussed below. Gross margin increased as a percentage of net sales during 1998 to 25% compared to 19% in 1997. This increase was primarily the result of a shift in revenue mix toward the Company's higher margin Power Macintosh G3 systems and newer PowerBook G3 systems, the low volume of lower margin consumer products shipped during the first three quarters of 1998, and the declining cost of various components of the Company's products, particularly those sourced from Asia. Improvements in the Company's inventory management also contributed to the increase in gross margins. During 1998, the Company simplified its product line, moving from approximately 15 separate individual products to three main product families. Further, the Company attempted to use as many industry standard parts in its newer products as possible, expanded the use of supplier hubs at manufacturing sites, and outsourced the manufacture of printed circuit boards and some systems assembly. These changes have allowed the Company to more accurately forecast demand, reduce inventory carrying levels and related costs, lessen the financial exposure resulting from inventory obsolescence and excess inventory levels, and reduce the component cost of obtaining certain standardized parts. The Company also made changes to its distribution model during 1998 and 1997 that contributed to the increase in gross margins in 1998. The Company significantly reduced the number of locations where it stages finished goods, generally holding inventory on a regional basis rather than in each country. Also, the Company significantly reduced the number of its distributors, authorized resellers, and national retail channel partners, particularly in the United States. These changes allowed the Company to reduce inventory and related financial exposures and reduced the inventory and related financial exposure associated with inventory held in the Company's distribution channels. The Company has also revised its distribution channel policies by decreasing the price protection and stock return privileges of its distributors and resellers. The Company anticipates that as lower priced consumer products become a larger share of net sales and the overall industry trend toward lower-priced products continues, gross margins will decline during fiscal 2000. The foregoing statement is forward-looking. The Company's actual results could differ because of several factors, including those set forth in the following paragraph and below in the subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." There can be no assurance targeted gross margin levels will be achieved or current margins on existing individual products will be maintained. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industry wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services, and potential changes to the Company's product mix, including higher unit sales of consumer products with lower average selling prices and lower gross margins. In response to these downward pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company's ability to effectively manage quality problems and warranty costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. The Company's operating strategy and pricing take into account anticipated changes in foreign currency exchange rates over time; however, the Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short term by fluctuations in exchange rates. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT The Company recognizes focused investments in research and development are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company's core business strategy. Expenditures on research and development increased 4% or $11 million to $314 million in 1999 as compared to 1998. This followed a $182 million or 38% decline in 1998 as compared to 1997. The overall decline in spending on research and development over the last two years is principally due to restructuring actions taken in 1996, 1997, and 1998 intended to focus the Company's research and development efforts on those projects perceived as critical to the Company's future success. These restructuring actions led to significant reductions in research and development related headcount and the cancellation of many research and development projects. SELLING, GENERAL, AND ADMINISTRATIVE Selling, general, and administrative expenditures increased 10% to $996 million in 1999 as compared to 1998 and increased to 16% of net sales in 1999 from 15% in 1998. These increases are primarily the result of increased spending on marketing and promotional activities throughout 1999 and a 12% increase in combined sales, marketing, and general and administrative headcount from the end of 1998 to the end of 1999. Selling, general, and administrative expenditures declined $378 million or 29% in 1998 compared to 1997 and declined to 15% of net sales in 1998 from 18% of net sales in 1997. These decreases were primarily the result of restructuring actions taken in 1996, 1997, and 1998, which resulted in reductions in headcount, closing of facilities, and write-down and disposal of operating assets during 1996, 1997, and 1998. Additionally, changes during 1998 in the Company's distribution channel policies and business model, including contraction and focus of the Company's product line and simplification of the Company's internal and external distribution channels, led to a reduction in selling expenses during 1998. SPECIAL CHARGES 1996 AND 1997 RESTRUCTURING ACTIONS In the second quarter of 1996, the Company announced and began to implement a restructuring plan designed to reduce costs and return the Company to profitability. The restructuring plan was necessitated by decreased demand for the Company's products and the Company's adoption of a new strategic direction. These actions resulted in a charge during 1996 of $179 million. During 1997, the Company announced and began to implement supplemental restructuring actions to meet the foregoing objectives of the plan. The Company recognized a $217 million charge during 1997 for the estimated incremental costs of those actions. All material restructuring actions contemplated under the plan were essentially complete at the end of fiscal 1998. The combined 1996 and 1997 restructuring actions consisted of terminating approximately 4,200 full-time employees; canceling or vacating certain facility leases as a result of those employee terminations; writing down certain land, buildings, and equipment to be sold as a result of downsizing operations and outsourcing various operational functions; and canceling contracts for projects and technologies that were not critical to the Company's core business strategy. The restructuring actions under the plan resulted in cash expenditures of $293 million and noncash asset write-downs of $95 million from the second quarter of 1996 through September 25, 1999. Of the combined 1996 and 1997 restructuring charges of $396 million, approximately $3 million was determined to be excess during the fourth quarter of 1999. The remaining balance of $5 million as of September 25, 1999, in accrued restructuring costs for the 1996 and 1997 restructuring actions is comprised of payments over the next two years on leases and contracts that had been terminated prior to fiscal 1999. The Company expects the remaining accrual will result in cash expenditures of $5 million over the next two years. 1999 RESTRUCTURING ACTIONS During the fourth quarter of 1999, the Company initiated restructuring actions resulting in a charge to operations of $21 million. The net restructuring charge of $18 million recognized during the fourth quarter of 1999 reflects the $3 million of excess reserves related to the 1996 and 1997 restructuring actions. The total cost of these actions of $21 million is comprised of $11 million for contract cancellation charges associated with the closure of the Company's outsourced data center and $10 million for contract cancellation charges related to supply and development agreements previously discontinued. The Company expects these actions to result in cash expenditures of $21 million over the next year. During the second quarter of 1999, the Company took certain actions to improve the flexibility and efficiency of its manufacturing operations by moving final assembly of certain of its products to third-party manufacturers. These restructuring actions resulted in the Company recognizing a charge to operations of approximately $9 million during the second quarter of 1999, which was comprised of $6 million for severance benefits to be paid to employees involuntarily terminated, $2 million for the write-down of operating assets to be disposed of, and $1 million for payments on canceled contracts. These actions resulted in the termination of approximately 580 employees and are substantially complete as of September 25, 1999. IN-PROCESS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT In May 1998, the Company acquired certain technology that was under development and had no alternative future use. The acquisition resulted in the recognition of $7 million of purchased in-process research and development, which was charged to operations upon acquisition. In February 1997, the Company acquired all of the outstanding shares of NeXT Software, Inc. (NeXT). NeXT had developed, marketed, and supported software enabling customers to implement business applications on the Internet/World Wide Web, intranets and enterprise-wide client/server networks. Of the total purchase price of $427 million, $375 million was allocated to purchased in-process research and development and $52 million was allocated to goodwill and other intangible assets. The purchased in-process research and development was charged to operations upon acquisition, and the goodwill and other intangible assets are being amortized on a straight-line basis over two to three years. TERMINATION OF LICENSE AGREEMENT In August 1997, the Company agreed to acquire certain assets of Power Computing Corporation (PCC), a licensed distributor of the Mac OS operating system, including PCC's customer database and its license to distribute the Mac OS. The agreement with PCC also included a release of claims between the parties. On January 28, 1998, the Company completed its acquisition of certain assets from PCC. The total purchase price was approximately $110 million, of which $75 million was expensed in the fourth quarter of 1997 as "termination of license agreement" and $35 million was recorded as goodwill in the second quarter of 1998. The goodwill is being amortized over three years. INTEREST AND OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NET Interest and other income and expense (net) increased $59 million or 211% to $87 million during 1999 as compared to 1998. This increase is attributable to two primary factors. First, the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased $926 million or 40% during 1999 resulting in an increase in interest income during 1999 of $44 million. Second, interest expense declined $15 million during 1999, primarily as a result of the conversion of approximately $661 million of the Company's convertible subordinated notes to common stock during the third quarter of 1999. During 1998, the Company experienced a $27 million increase in interest income net of interest expense, the result of higher cash and investment balances and lower average short-term borrowings, offset by decreased foreign exchange gains and increased other expense. GAINS FROM SALES OF INVESTMENT As of September 26, 1997, the Company owned 42.3% of the outstanding stock of ARM Holdings plc (ARM), a privately held company in the United Kingdom involved in the design of high performance microprocessors and related technology. The Company had accounted for this investment using the equity method through September 25, 1998. On April 17, 1998, ARM completed an initial public offering of its stock on the London Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ National Market. The Company sold 18.9% of its shares in the offering for a gain before foreign taxes of approximately $24 million, which was recognized as other income. Foreign tax recognized on this gain was approximately $7 million. At the time an equity method investee sells existing or newly issued common stock to unrelated parties in excess of its book value, the equity method requires the net book value of the investment be adjusted to reflect the investor's share of the change in the investee's shareholders' equity resulting from the sale. It is the Company's policy to record an adjustment reflecting its share of the change in the investee's shareholders' equity resulting from such a sale as a gain or loss in other income. Consequently, the Company also recognized in the third quarter of 1998 other income of approximately $16 million to reflect its remaining 25.9% ownership interest in the increased net book value of ARM following its initial public offering. As of September 25, 1998, the carrying value of the Company's investment in ARM carried in other assets in the consolidated balance sheet was approximately $22 million. On October 14, 1998, the Company sold 11.6 million shares (split adjusted) of ARM stock. As a result of this sale, the Company's ownership interest in ARM fell to 19.7%. Consequently, beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 1999, the Company ceased accounting for its remaining investment in ARM using the equity method and categorized its remaining shares as available-for-sale requiring the shares be carried at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses net of taxes reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. During fiscal 1999, the Company sold approximately 32.6 million shares (split adjusted) of ARM stock for net proceeds of approximately $245 million, recorded a gain before taxes of approximately $230 million, and recognized related income tax of approximately $25 million. As of September 25, 1999, the Company's remaining 16 million shares of ARM stock are valued at $226 million. The fair value of the Company's investment in ARM is reflected in other assets as of September 25, 1999, with an offsetting amount net of $84 million of related deferred income taxes recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income. PROVISION (BENEFIT) FOR INCOME TAXES As of September 25, 1999, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $613 million before being offset against certain deferred tax liabilities for presentation on the Company's balance sheet. A substantial portion of this asset is realizable based on the ability to offset existing deferred tax liabilities. As of September 25, 1999, a valuation allowance of $60 million was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of tax losses that may not be realized. The valuation allowance relates to the operating loss carryforwards acquired from NeXT and to tax benefits in certain foreign jurisdictions. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. The Company's effective tax rate for fiscal 1999 was 11% compared to the higher statutory rate due primarily to the reversal of a portion of the previously established valuation allowance and certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes were provided. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has proposed federal income tax deficiencies for the years 1984 through 1991, and the Company has made certain prepayments thereon. The Company contested the proposed deficiencies by filing petitions with the United States Tax Court, and most of the issues in dispute have now been resolved. On June 30, 1997, the IRS proposed income tax adjustments for the years 1992 through 1994. Although most of the issues for these years have been resolved, certain issues still remain in dispute and are being contested by the Company. Management believes adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. The Company anticipates its effective tax rate for fiscal 2000 will be approximately 25%. The foregoing statement is forward-looking. The Company's actual results could differ because of several factors, including those set forth below in the subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." Additionally, the actual future tax rate will be significantly impacted by the amount of and jurisdiction in which the Company's foreign profits are earned. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES The following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions): - ------------------------ (a) Based on ending net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period. (b) Based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each period. As of September 25, 1999, the Company had $3.226 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, an increase of $926 million or 40% over the same balances at the end of fiscal 1998. During fiscal 1999, the Company's primary source of cash was $798 million in cash flows from operating activities. Cash generated by operations was primarily from net income, declines in accounts receivables and inventory resulting from improved asset management, and an increase in accounts payable. The Company's cash and cash equivalent balances as of September 25, 1999 and 1998, include $4 million and $56 million, respectively, pledged as collateral to support letters of credit. In addition to the net purchase of short-term investments of $1.081 billion, net cash used by investing activities included $112 million for the purchase of investments in Samsung and Akamai discussed below and $47 million for the purchase of fixed assets. These uses of cash were partially offset by proceeds from the sale of ARM stock of $245 million and proceeds from the sale of equipment of $23 million. The Company expects the level of capital expenditures in 2000 will increase moderately from 1999. In July 1999, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a plan for the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This repurchase plan does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. As of September 25, 1999, the Company had repurchased a total of 1.25 million shares of its common stock at a cost of $75 million. On November 18, 1999, the Company entered into a $100 million revolving credit agreement with Bank of America. Loans under the agreement pay interest at LIBOR plus 1%, and the Company is required to pay a commitment fee of 0.2% of the unused portion of the credit facility. No advances have been made against this credit facility. This revolving credit agreement is intended to provide the Company with an additional source of liquidity and to provide additional support to the Company's capital position in the event of short-term liquidity disturbances in worldwide financial markets associated with the Year 2000 crossover. The Company believes its balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to meet its cash requirements over the next twelve months, including any cash utilized by its stock repurchase plan. However, given the Company's current non-investment grade debt ratings, if the Company should need to obtain short-term borrowings, there can no assurance such borrowings could be obtained at favorable rates. The inability to obtain such borrowings at favorable rates could materially adversely affect the Company's results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity. OTHER LONG-TERM INVESTMENTS As discussed above, the Company has categorized its shares in ARM as available-for-sale requiring the shares be carried at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses net of taxes reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. As of September 25, 1999, the Company held 16 million shares of ARM stock valued at $226 million. During the first quarter of fiscal 2000 through December 17, 1999, the Company sold an additional 5.1 million shares of ARM stock for net proceeds of approximately $136 million and gains before taxes of approximately $134 million. As of December 17, 1999, the Company holds 10.9 million shares of ARM stock valued at approximately $690 million. During the fourth quarter of 1999, the Company invested $100 million in Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd (Samsung) to assist in the further expansion of Samsung's TFT-LCD flat-panel display production capacity. The investment, in the form of three year unsecured bonds, is convertible into approximately 550,000 shares of Samsung common stock beginning in June 2000. The bonds carry an annual coupon rate of 2% and pay a total yield to maturity of 5% if redeemed at their maturity. In June 1999, the Company invested $12.5 million in Akamai Technologies, Inc. (Akamai), a global Internet content delivery service. The investment was in the form of convertible preferred stock that converted into 4.1 million shares of Akamai common stock (adjusted for subsequent stock splits) at the time of Akamai's initial public offering in October 1999. The Company is restricted from selling more than 25% of its shares within one year after the date of the closing of a public offering of Akamai's stock. Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2000, the Company has categorized its shares in Akamai as available-for-sale requiring they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses net of taxes reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. As of December 17, 1999, the fair value of the Company's investment in Akamai was approximately $1.2 billion. Because Akamai is a newly public company and its stock price has experienced significant volatility, the fair value of the Company's investment in Akamai may fluctuate significantly in the future. YEAR 2000 COMPLIANCE THE INFORMATION PRESENTED BELOW RELATED TO YEAR 2000 (Y2K) COMPLIANCE CONTAINS FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS THAT ARE SUBJECT TO RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES. THE COMPANY'S ACTUAL RESULTS MAY DIFFER SIGNIFICANTLY FROM THOSE DISCUSSED BELOW AND ELSEWHERE IN THIS FORM 10-K REGARDING Y2K COMPLIANCE. YEAR 2000 The Year 2000 (Y2K) issue is the result of certain computer hardware, operating system software and software application programs having been developed using two digits rather than four to define a year. For example, the clock circuit in the hardware may be incapable of holding a date beyond the year 1999; some operating systems may recognize a date using "00" as the year 1900 rather than 2000 and certain applications may have limited date processing capabilities. These problems could result in the failure of major systems or miscalculations, which could have a material impact on companies through business interruption or shutdown, financial loss, damage to reputation, and legal liability to third parties. Y2K PLAN The Company's Information Systems and Technology department (IS&T) began addressing the Y2K issue in 1996 as part of its Next Generation strategy, which addressed the need for ongoing enhancement and replacement of the Company's various disparate legacy information technology (IT) Systems. In 1998, the Company established a Year 2000 Executive Steering Committee (Steering Committee) comprised of senior executives of the Company and the Company's Year 2000 Project Management Office (PMO). The PMO reports to the Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, the Steering Committee, and the Audit and Finance Committee of the Board of Directors. The PMO developed and manages the Company's worldwide Y2K strategic plan (Y2K Plan) to address the potential impact of Y2K on the Company's operations and business processes. In particular, the Y2K Plan addresses four principal areas that may be impacted by the Y2K issue: Apple Branded Products; Third Party Relationships; Non-IT Business Systems; and IT Systems. With respect to the IT Systems and Non-IT Business Systems, the Y2K Plan consists of four separate but overlapping phases: Phase I--Inventory and Risk Assessment; Phase II--Remediation Cost Estimation; Phase III--Remediation; and Phase IV--Remediation Testing. In addition, the Company has an ongoing Y2K Awareness Program designed to keep employees informed about Y2K issues. The discussion below reflects management's estimate of the current status of the four principal areas of the Company's Y2K Plan. Regardless of the current status, all areas of the Y2K Plan remain under review and subject to modification as deemed necessary throughout the remainder of calendar 1999 through the date rollover and into January 2000. APPLE BRANDED PRODUCTS The Company designs and manufactures personal computers, related peripherals, operating system software and application software, including Macintosh personal computers and the Mac OS, which are marketed under the "Apple" brand (collectively "Apple Branded Products"). The Company tested certain Apple Branded Products to determine Y2K compliance, although such testing did not include third party products bundled with Apple Branded Products and certain Apple Branded Products no longer distributed and/or supported by the Company. For purposes of this discussion, Y2K compliant means a product will not produce errors processing date data in connection with the year change from December 31, 1999, to January 1, 2000, when used with accurate date data in accordance with its documentation, provided all other products (including other software, firmware and hardware) used with it properly exchange date data with it. A Y2K compliant product will recognize the Year 2000 as a leap year. Information about testing and Y2K compliance of Apple Branded Products is available on the Apple corporate web site under the heading "Year 2000 Readiness Disclosure", at www.apple.com/about/year/. Such information, which is updated on an ongoing basis, is not to be considered part of this annual report. Because the Company does not control the design of non-Apple Branded Products or third party products that are bundled with Apple Branded Products, it cannot assure such products are Y2K compliant. Some Apple Branded Products installed at customer sites may require upgrades or other remediation. While the Company believes its customers are responsible for the Y2K readiness of their IT and business environments, the Company has taken steps to assist customers in achieving their readiness goals. Apple is issuing software updates (at no additional charge) for most, but not all, known issues in certain Apple Branded Products. THIRD PARTY RELATIONSHIPS The Company's business operations are heavily dependent on third party corporate service vendors, materials suppliers, outsourced operations partners, distributors and others. The Company is working with key external parties to identify and attempt to mitigate the potential risks to it of Y2K. The failure of external parties to resolve their own Y2K issues in a timely manner could result in a material financial risk to the Company. As part of its Y2K Plan and to establish the state of readiness of certain third parties, the Company is actively communicating on an ongoing basis with certain third parties whose lack of Y2K compliance would present a high degree of risk to the Company. Based on information obtained from various sources, the Company believes it is reasonably possible there will be interruptions around the world in critical services such as air traffic control, airfreight transportation, customs clearance, telecommunications, and power utilities early in calendar year 2000 that could result in shipping delays of raw material and finished goods. The Company also believes it is reasonably possible that worldwide financial markets could exhibit unusual short-term volatility and liquidity disturbances at the end of calendar 1999 and at the beginning of calendar 2000. Such events could result in material adverse effects on the Company's results of operations and financial position. See further discussion regarding this issue below under the heading "Contingency Plans." The Company has substantially completed its review of certain third parties as of the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 1999. Although numerous third parties have advised the Company they are addressing their Y2K issues, the readiness of third parties overall varies widely. Because the Company's Y2K compliance is dependent on the timely Y2K compliance of third parties, there can be no assurances the Company's efforts alone will resolve all Y2K issues. The Company continues to communicate with and monitor the compliance efforts of key third parties. The Company will continue these efforts with key third parties through the date rollover and into January 2000. IT SYSTEMS AND NON-IT BUSINESS SYSTEMS Phase I--Inventory and Risk Assessment: This Phase requires an inventory and assessment of the Non-IT Business Systems used by the Company, including systems with embedded technology, building access systems, and health and safety systems. This Phase also includes inventory and assessment of IT Systems used by the Company, including large IS&T systems, desktop hardware and software, and network hardware and software. Each system is evaluated and the business risk is quantified as being High, Medium or Low Risk to the Company's business. Systems that are High Risk are those, which if uncorrected, would cause an interruption of or complete failure to conduct the Company's business. Medium Risks are those that would negatively impact the business but complete cessation could be avoided with some inconvenience. Low Risks are those where the risk to business interruption or cessation are remote. The Company intends that High and Medium Risk items will be remediated or replaced, and Low Risk items will likely not be addressed prior to the Year 2000. The status of the Company's remediation efforts is discussed below. The Company had substantially completed the Inventory and Risk Assessment Phase for both IT Systems and Non-IT Systems by the end of the third quarter of fiscal 1999. However, the Company has and will continue to review information developed as the result of its Y2K Plan, which could result in additional items being added to its Y2K inventory. Phase II--Remediation Cost Estimation: This Phase involves the analysis of each High and Medium Risk to determine how such risks may be remediated and the cost of such remediation. The Company has substantially completed this Phase for both IT and Non-IT Business Systems. Phase III--Remediation: This Phase includes the replacement or correction of the High and Medium Risk Non-IT Business Systems and IT Systems. The Company substantially completed this Phase for both IT and Non-IT Business Systems during the fourth quarter of fiscal 1999. Phase IV--Remediation Testing: This Phase includes the future date testing of the remediation efforts made in Phase III to confirm that the changes made bring the affected systems into compliance, no new problems have arisen as a result of the remediation, and new systems that replaced noncompliant systems are Y2K compliant. The Company substantially completed this Phase for both IT and Non-IT Business Systems during the first quarter of fiscal 2000. COSTS TO ADDRESS Y2K The costs of the Y2K program are primarily costs associated with the utilization of existing internal resources and incremental external spending. The Company's current estimate of total incremental external spending over the life of its Y2K plan to address those risks identified as High or Medium is approximately $10 million of which approximately $9 million had been spent as of September 25, 1999. As the Company's Y2K Plan continues, the actual future incremental spending may prove to be higher. Also, this estimate does not include the costs that could be incurred by the Company if one or more of its significant third party vendors fails to achieve Y2K compliance. The Company is not separately identifying and including in these estimates the Y2K costs incurred that are the result of utilization of the Company's existing internal resources. CONTINGENCY PLANS Under the guidance and management of the PMO, the Company is in the final stages of developing, implementing, and testing Y2K contingency plans for critical business operations. The Company's contingency plans, which are based in part on the assessment of the magnitude and probability of potential risks, primarily focus on proactive steps to prevent Y2K failures from occurring, or if they should occur, to detect them quickly, minimize their impact and expedite their remediation. The Y2K contingency plans will supplement existing disaster recovery and business continuity plans. As part of its contingency plans, the Company has developed a global Incident Management Team (IMT) to identify, escalate, and mitigate the potential impact of various Y2K failures. The IMT is comprised of personnel from the PMO as well as key areas of the Company's operations. The IMT will begin to monitor the date rollover commencing with Sydney, Australia and will "follow the sun" through the time change in the Pacific Standard Time zone. The Company's contingency planning efforts were approximately 85% complete at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 1999 and are expected to be substantially completed during the first quarter of fiscal 2000. The Company believes it is reasonably possible there will be interruptions in air traffic control, airfreight transportation, customs clearance, telecommunications, and power utilities early in calendar year 2000 that could result in shipping delays of raw material and finished goods and other business interruptions. The Company has developed and implemented contingency plans to mitigate the effects of a short-term interruption in such services. However, if the interruption in these services last for an extended period of time, or if alternative Y2K compliant services are not readily available at reasonable cost, there could be material adverse effects on the Company's results of operations and financial position. The Company also believes it is reasonably possible worldwide financial markets could exhibit unusual short-term volatility and liquidity disturbances at the end of calendar 1999 and at the beginning of calendar 2000. The Company has developed and implemented contingency plans to mitigate some of the potential short-term effects of such disturbances. However, if these disturbances in the financial markets last for an extended period of time, or if alternative mitigating actions are not readily available at reasonable cost, there could be material adverse effects on the Company's results of operations and financial position. RISK FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH Y2K ISSUES The Company has substantially completed its initial assessment of reasonably likely worst case scenarios of Non-IT Business Systems and/or IT Systems failures and related consequences. Based on current information, the Company believes the most likely worst case scenario is it will experience minor malfunctions and failures of its IT Systems and Non-IT Business Systems at the beginning of the Year 2000 not previously detected during the Company's inventory and risk assessment and remediation activities. The Company currently believes these malfunctions and failures will not have a material impact on its results of operations or financial condition. However, there can be no assurance the Y2K remediation by the Company or third parties will be properly and timely completed, and the failure to do so could have a material adverse effect on the Company, its business, its results of operations, and its financial condition. In particular, the Company believes a lack of Y2K readiness by its significant third party vendors could cause material interruptions in the Company's operations. The identification of additional issues with respect to the Y2K compliance of key third parties could have a material adverse effect on the Company's results of operations. In addition, important factors that could cause results to differ materially include, but are not limited to, the ability of the Company to successfully identify systems and vendors that have a Y2K issue, the nature and amount of remediation effort required to fix the affected systems, the adequacy of such remediation efforts, the production-related contingency plans of competitors with the Company's third party suppliers, and the costs and availability of labor and resources to successfully address the Y2K issues and/or to execute on any required contingency plans. FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE RESULTS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION COMPETITION The personal computer industry is highly competitive and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, continual improvement in product price/performance characteristics, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a large number of competitors. The Company's results of operations and financial condition have been, and in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by industry wide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross margins. The industry has also been characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality, hardware performance, and features based on existing or emerging industry standards. Several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target certain of the Company's key market segments, including consumer, education and publishing. Additionally, several of the Company's competitors have introduced or announced plans to introduce products that mimic many of the unique design and technical features of the Company's products. Many of the Company's competitors have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources, as well as broader product lines and larger installed customer bases than those of the Company. Additionally, the Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by overall demand for personal computers and general customer preferences for one platform over another or one set of product features over another. The Company is currently the only maker of hardware using the Mac OS. The Mac OS has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers utilizing Microsoft Windows operating systems. The Company believes the innovative industrial design of its products, the unique set of features its products currently provide, the perceived advantages of the Mac OS over Windows, and the general reluctance of the Macintosh installed base to incur the costs of switching platforms, have been driving forces behind sales of the Company's personal computer hardware in recent years. The Company is currently taking and will continue to take steps to respond to the competitive pressures being placed on its personal computer sales as a result of the recent innovations in the Windows platform. The Company's future operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on its ability to continue to develop improvements to the Macintosh platform in order to maintain perceived design and functional advantages over competing platforms. PRODUCT INTRODUCTIONS AND TRANSITIONS Due to the highly volatile nature of the personal computer industry, which is characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company must continually introduce new products and technologies and enhance existing products in order to remain competitive. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance, the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with product transitions, the availability of application software for new products, the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand, and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. The Company plans to continue to introduce upgrades to the current Mac OS, Mac OS 9, and later introduce a new operating system, Mac OS X Client, which is expected to offer advanced functionality based on Apple and NeXT software technologies. It is uncertain whether Mac OS X will gain developer support and market acceptance. Inability to successfully develop and make timely delivery of a substantially backward-compatible Mac OS X or of planned enhancements to the current Mac OS, or to gain developer support and market acceptance for those operating systems, may have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and financial condition. INVENTORY AND SUPPLY The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products that have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand and accrues for any cancellation fees of orders for inventories that have been canceled. Although the Company believes its inventory and related provisions are adequate, given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the computer industry, no assurance can be given the Company will not incur additional inventory and related charges. In addition, such charges have had, and may again have, a material effect on the Company's financial position and results of operations. The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce excess or insufficient inventories of particular products. The Company's operating results and financial condition have been in the past and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. Many of the Company's products are manufactured in whole or in part by third-party manufacturers. In addition, the Company has outsourced much of its transportation and logistics management. While outsourcing arrangements may lower the fixed cost of operations, they also reduce the Company's direct control over production and distribution. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the products manufactured, or the flexibility of the Company to respond to changing market conditions. Moreover, although arrangements with such manufacturers may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company remains at least initially responsible to the ultimate consumer for warranty service. Accordingly, in the event of product defects or warranty liability, the Company may remain primarily liable. Any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with contract manufacturers or otherwise, could adversely affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition. Although certain components essential to the Company's business are generally available from multiple sources, other key components (including microprocessors and application specific integrated circuits ("ASICs")) are currently obtained by the Company from single or limited sources. Some other key components (including without limitation DRAM and TFT-LCD flat-panel displays), while currently available to the Company from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry wide availability and pricing pressures. If the supply of a key component were to be delayed or constrained, the Company's business and financial performance could be adversely affected, depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or, if possible, to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from an alternate source. The Company and other producers in the personal computer industry also compete for other semiconductor products with other industries that have experienced increased demand for such products, due to either increased consumer demand or increased use of semiconductors in their products (such as the cellular phone and automotive industries). Finally, the Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry (including certain microprocessors and ASICs). Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of components other than those customized to meet the Company's requirements. Such product supply constraints and corresponding increased costs could decrease the Company's net sales and adversely affect the Company's operating results and financial condition. The Company's ability to produce and market competitive products is also dependent on the ability and desire of IBM and Motorola, the sole suppliers of the PowerPC RISC-based microprocessor for the Company's Macintosh computers, to provide the Company with a sufficient supply of microprocessors with price/performance features that compare favorably to those supplied to the Company's competitors by Intel Corporation, and other developers and producers of microprocessors used by personal computers using the Windows operating systems. Further discussion relating to availability and supply of components and product may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Raw Materials," and in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 8 under the subheading "Concentrations in the Available Sources of Supply of Materials and Product," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION The Company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers and cataloguers, and directly to education institutions for resale (collectively referred to as "resellers"). In addition, the Company also sells many of its products in most of its major markets directly to end users through its on-line store. Many of the Company's significant resellers operate on narrow product margins. Most such resellers also distribute products from competing manufacturers. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakened, if resellers within consumer channels were to cease distribution of the Company's products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the Company's products causes resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company's products. Further information regarding risks associated with Marketing and Distribution may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Markets and Distribution," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. GLOBAL MARKET RISKS A large portion of the Company's revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company's operating results and financial condition could be significantly affected by risks associated with international activities, including economic and labor conditions, political instability, tax laws (including U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiaries), and changes in the value of the U.S. dollar versus the local currency in which the products are sold and goods and services are purchased. Countries in the Asia Pacific region, including Japan, have recently experienced weaknesses in their currency, banking and equity markets. These weaknesses have adversely affected and may continue to adversely affect consumer demand for the Company's products, the U.S. dollar value of the Company's foreign currency denominated sales, the availability and cost of product components to the Company, and consequently the Company's results of operations. Further information related to the Company's global market risks may be found in Part II, Item 7A Item 7 of Form 10-K under the subheading "Global Market Risks" included under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. Domestic net sales declined 26% during 1997 compared with 1996, due to decreases in unit sales of Macintosh computers and peripheral products and in the average aggregate revenue per peripheral unit. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit in the U.S. did not change in 1997 compared with 1996. During 1997, as compared with 1996, the Company's estimated share of the worldwide and U.S. personal computer markets declined to 3.6% from 5.7%, and to 4.6% from 7.4%, respectively, based upon current market information provided by industry sources. The Company believes that net sales will be below the level of the prior year's comparable periods through at least the second fiscal quarter of 1998, if not longer. Q4 97 COMPARED WITH Q4 96 Net sales decreased 30% in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the same quarter of 1996. Total Macintosh computer unit sales and peripheral unit sales decreased 30% and 32%, respectively, in the fourth quarter of 1997, compared with the same period of 1996, which the Company believes was due principally to continued customer concerns regarding the Company's strategic direction, financial condition and future prospects, and the viability of the Macintosh platform, and to competitive pressures in the marketplace. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit decreased slightly in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the same period of 1996, as a result of continued pricing actions, including increased rebates, across most product lines, partially offset by an increase in the average aggregate revenue per Powerbook unit. The average aggregate revenue per peripheral product also decreased slightly for the foregoing reasons. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh computer unit and per peripheral unit will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including industrywide pricing pressures, increased competition, and the need to stimulate demand for the Company's products. International net sales represented 42% of total net sales in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with 47% of net sales in the same period of 1996. International net sales declined 38% in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the same period of 1996. Net sales decreased in the European markets and decreased significantly in Japan during the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the same period of 1996, as a result of decreases in Macintosh and peripheral unit sales in Europe and Japan and in the average aggregate revenue per peripheral unit in the European markets and the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit in Japan. These decreases were partially offset by increases in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit in Europe and the average aggregate revenue per peripheral unit in Japan. Further discussion relating to factors contributing to the decline in net sales in the Japanese market may be found in this Part II, Item 7 of Form 10-K under the subheading "Global Market Risks" included under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. Domestic net sales declined 24% in the fourth quarter of 1997 over the comparable period of 1996, due to decreases in unit sales of Macintosh computers and peripheral products and in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit, partially offset by an increase in the average aggregate revenue per peripheral unit. During the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the comparable period of 1996, the Company's estimated share of the worldwide and U.S. personal computer markets declined to 3.1% from 5.2%, and to 4.3% from 6.6%, respectively, based upon current market information provided by industry sources. Q4 97 COMPARED WITH Q3 97 Net sales decreased 7% in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the third quarter of 1997. Total Macintosh computer unit sales decreased 8% in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the prior quarter which the Company believes was due principally to continued customer concerns regarding the Company's strategic direction, financial condition and future prospects, and the viability of the Macintosh platform, and to competitive pressures in the marketplace, as well as continued easing of pent-up demand for new PowerBook products which were introduced in the second quarter. In addition, unit sales in Japan decreased significantly in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the third quarter of 1997, primarily as a result of a weaker personal computer market. Unit sales of peripheral products decreased slightly in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the third quarter of 1997. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh computer unit remained constant as higher average aggregate revenue per "Value" (entry level Power Macintosh) unit was offset by a lower average aggregate revenue per Powerbook unit and aggressive pricing on discontinued products. The average aggregate revenue per peripheral unit decreased 5% in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the third quarter of 1997. Furthermore, the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh computer and peripheral unit was unfavorably affected by pricing actions, including increased rebates, across most product lines. International net sales represented 42% of total net sales in the fourth quarter of 1997, compared with 53% in the third quarter of 1997. International net sales decreased 27% in the fourth quarter compared with the third quarter of 1997, primarily as a result of a significant decrease in net sales of Macintosh computers and peripheral products in Japan and a decrease in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit, slightly offset by an increase in the average aggregate revenue per peripheral unit. Further discussion relating to factors contributing to the decline in net sales in the Japanese market may be found in this Part II, Item 7 of Form 10-K under the subheading "Global Market Risks" included under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. Domestic net sales increased 15% in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the prior quarter, due to increases in Macintosh and peripheral unit sales and the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh computer unit, which increases were slightly offset by a decrease in the average aggregate revenue per peripheral unit. During the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the third quarter of 1997, the Company's estimated share of the worldwide and U.S. personal computer markets decreased to 3.1% from 3.7%, and to 4.3% from 4.7%, respectively, based upon current market information provided by industry sources. YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 27, 1996 COMPARED WITH YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 29, 1995 Net sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing $1,229 million, or 11%; $1,545 million, or 19%; and $682 million, or 23%; during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995, due to a decrease in net sales of Macintosh computers and of peripheral products. Total Macintosh computer unit sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing 11%, 19%, and 26% during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995. This decline in unit sales was a result of a decline or lack of growth in worldwide demand for all product families, which the Company believes was due principally to customer concerns regarding the Company's strategic direction, financial condition, and future prospects, and due to delays in the shipment of certain PowerBook products as a result of quality problems. In addition, unit sales of peripheral products trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing 20%, 24%, and 30% during the twelve, nine and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995, for the reasons noted above. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit increased slightly during the twelve and three months ended September 27, 1996, and decreased slightly during the nine months ended September 27, 1996, compared with the same periods in 1995, primarily due to a continued shift in product mix toward the Company's newer products and products with multimedia configurations, offset to varying degrees by pricing actions across all product lines. The average aggregate revenue per peripheral product was flat during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996 compared with the same periods in 1995. International net sales represented 52% of net sales in 1996 compared with 48% of net sales in 1995. International net sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing 3%, 11% and 13% during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995. Net sales in European markets trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996 compared with the same periods in 1995, as a result of a decrease in Macintosh and peripheral unit sales, partially offset by an increase in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh and per peripheral unit, primarily during the first part of the year. Net sales in Japan trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996 compared with the same periods in 1995. An increase in Macintosh unit sales during these periods was more than offset by a decrease in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh and per peripheral unit and a decrease in peripheral unit sales. Domestic net sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing by 18%, 26%, and 30% for the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the corresponding periods in 1995, resulting from a decline or lack of growth in demand for all product families. In the fourth quarter of 1996 compared with the fourth quarter of 1995, the Company's share of the worldwide and U.S. personal computer markets declined to 5.4% from 8.7%, and to 7.3% from 13.2%, respectively, based on current information provided by industry sources. BACKLOG In general, the Company's resellers purchase products on an as-needed basis. Resellers frequently change delivery schedules and order rates depending on changing market conditions. Unfilled orders (backlog) can be, and often are, canceled at will. The Company attempts to fill orders on the requested delivery schedules. However, products may be in relatively short supply from time to time until production volumes have reached a level sufficient to meet demand or if other production or fulfillment constraints exist. The Company's backlog of unfilled orders decreased to approximately $230 million at November 28, 1997 from approximately $563 million at November 29, 1996 and consisted primarily of the Company's "Flagship" line of higher-end Power Macintosh products. The Company's backlog at November 29, 1996 consisted primarily of the Company's PowerBook products, as well as the Company's "Flagship" line of higher-end Power Macintosh products. The Company expects that substantially all of its orders in backlog at November 28, 1997 will be either shipped or canceled during fiscal 1998. In the Company's experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following introduction of new products because of overordering by dealers anticipating shortages. Backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, as well as other factors affecting the Company's backlog, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company's ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance. Further information regarding the Company's backlog may be found in Part II, Item 7 of this Form 10-K under the subheading "Product Introductions and Transitions" included under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. GROSS MARGIN Gross margin represents the difference between the Company's net sales and its cost of goods sold. The amount of revenue generated per unit sold is influenced by the price set by the Company for its products. The cost of goods sold is based primarily on the cost of components and, to a lesser extent, direct labor costs. The type and cost of components included in particular configurations of the Company's products (such as memory and disk drives) are often directly related to the need to market products in configurations competitive with other manufacturers. Competition in the personal computer industry is intense and, in the short term, frequent changes in pricing and product configuration are often necessary in order to remain competitive. Accordingly, gross margin as a percentage of net sales can be significantly influenced in the short term by actions undertaken by the Company in response to industrywide competitive pressures. Gross margin increased from 10% to 19% of sales during 1997 compared to 1996, primarily as a result of a $616 million charge in the second quarter of 1996 that related principally to the write-down of certain inventory, as well as to the cost of cancelling excess component orders necessitated by significantly lower than expected demand for many of the Company's products, primarily its "Value" line of Power Macintosh products (formerly generally referred to as entry level and Performa-Registered Trademark- products). The Company separately incurred approximately $145 million in charges during 1996 to provide for the estimated costs of correcting certain quality problems in certain of its "Value" line of Power Macintosh products, as well as PowerBook and peripheral products, covering both goods held in inventory and shipped goods. In addition, gross margins in the second quarter of 1996, and to a lesser degree the first quarter of that year, were adversely affected by aggressive pricing actions in Japan in response to extreme competitive actions by other companies, as well as price reductions in the United States and Europe across all product lines in order to stimulate demand. Gross margin decreased from 22% to 20% of sales during the fourth quarter of 1997 compared to the same period of 1996, and remained constant compared to the third quarter of 1997. This was primarily as a result of certain pricing actions effected by the Company as noted above, as well as the Company's inability to fulfill all purchase orders of certain high-margin Power Macintosh product due to the unavailability of sufficient quantities of certain components, which were offset to varying degrees by sales of the Company's new operating system, Mac OS 8, during the fourth quarter of 1997. The gross margin levels in the fourth quarter of 1997 compared with the third quarter of 1997 and the fourth quarter of 1996, and in 1997 compared with 1996, were also adversely affected by a stronger U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies. This negative impact was offset by currency hedging. The Company's operating strategy and pricing take into account changes in exchange rates over time; however, the Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short term by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to sustain the gross margin levels achieved in 1997. Gross margins will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industrywide global pricing pressures, increased competition, and compressed product life cycles. In response to these downward pressures, the Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. The Company expects to experience additional pricing pressure through at least the first fiscal quarter of 1998 as a result of the Company winding down its Mac OS licensing program, including the acquisition of its Mac OS license and other assets of Power Computing Corporation ("PCC"), as the Company expects certain Mac OS licensees to sell aggressively their remaining inventory in early fiscal 1998. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company's ability to effectively manage quality problems and warranty costs, and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Gross margin decreased to 10% in 1996 compared with 26% in 1995. This decrease is primarily the result of a $616 million charge in the second quarter of 1996 for the write-down of certain inventory, as well as the costs of cancelling excess component orders, necessitated by significantly lower than expected demand for many of the Company's products, primarily its entry-level products. The Company separately incurred approximately $145 million in charges during the last nine months of 1996 to provide for the estimated costs of correcting certain quality problems in certain of the "Value" line of Power Macintosh products as well as PowerBook and peripheral products, covering both goods held in inventory and shipped goods. The Company also incurred greater warranty expenses per unit sold during 1996 compared with 1995. The decrease in gross margin was also due to the Company's response to extreme competitive actions by other companies attempting to gain market share, including the Company's pricing actions in the U.S., Japan and Europe across most product lines, which were partially offset by a decrease in the cost of certain product components. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Research and development expenditures decreased in dollar amounts in 1997 when compared with 1996, primarily due to certain restructuring actions, including a reduction in headcount and the cancellation of certain research and development related contracts, taken during 1997. The increase in research and development expenses as a percentage of net sales resulted from a decrease in the level of net sales. There was a slight decrease in research and development expenditures during 1996 compared with 1995. The slight increase as a percentage of net sales in 1996 over 1995 was the result of a decrease in net sales during 1996. The Company believes that continued and focused investments in research and development are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to continued, timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company's core business strategy. The Company believes that research and development expenditures will decrease in 1998 compared to 1997 as the Company completes and more fully realizes the cost reduction benefits of its restructuring plan. Information relating to in-process research and development may be found in this Part II, Item 7 of Form 10-K under the subheading "In-process Research and Development" included under the heading "Special Charges," which information is hereby incorporated by reference. SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE Selling, general and administrative expenditures decreased in dollar amounts in 1997 when compared to 1996, primarily due to certain restructuring actions, including a reduction in headcount, the closing of facilities, and the writedown of assets, taken during 1997, and to lower variable expenses. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenditures as a percentage of net sales resulted from a decrease in the level of net sales. In 1996, selling, general and administrative expenditures remained essentially flat when compared to 1995. The increase as a percentage of net sales in 1996 over 1995 was the result of a decrease in net sales during 1996. The Company believes that selling, general and administrative expenditures will decrease in 1998 compared to 1997 as the Company completes and more fully realizes the cost reduction benefits of its restructuring plan. The Company believes that selling, general and administrative expenditures will decrease only slightly in the first quarter of 1998 compared to the fourth quarter of 1997 as a result of continued cost reduction benefits from the restructuring plan, partially offset by planned advertising spending. SPECIAL CHARGES IN-PROCESS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT As a result of the NeXT acquisition, the Company took a substantial charge for in-process research and development during 1997. Further discussion relating to the Company's acquisition of NeXT, including the related in-process research and development charge, may be found in Part II, Item 8 Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. All information is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. (Tabular information: Dollars in millions, except per share amounts) NM: Not Meaningful Overview During the last nine months of 1996, the Company experienced a significant decline in net sales, units shipped, and share of the personal computer market. This decline in demand and the resulting losses, coupled with intense price competition throughout the industry, led to the Company's decision to implement a new strategic direction intended to improve the Company's competitiveness and restore its profitability. The Company has initiated programs to develop and market products and services more selectively targeted to education, home, and business segments. In moving in this new strategic direction, the Company expects to reduce the number of new product introductions and the number of products in certain categories within its current product portfolio. Net Sales Net sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing $1,229 million, or 11%; $1,545 million, or 19%; and $682 million, or 23%; during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995, due to a decrease in net sales of Macintosh(registered trademark) computers and of peripheral products such as displays and printers. Total Macintosh computer unit sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing 11%, 19%, and 26% during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995. This decline in unit sales was a result of a decline or lack of growth in worldwide demand for all product families, which the Company believes was due principally to customer concerns regarding the Company's strategic direction, financial condition, and future prospects, and due to delays in the shipment of certain PowerBook(registered trademark) products as a result of quality problems. In addition, unit sales of peripheral products trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing 20%, 24%, and 30% during the twelve, nine and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995, for the reasons noted above. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit increased slightly during the twelve and three months ended September 27, 1996, and decreased slightly during the nine months ended September 27, 1996, compared with the same periods in 1995, primarily due to a continued shift in product mix toward the Company's newer products and products with multimedia configurations, offset to varying degrees by pricing actions across all product lines in order to stimulate demand. The average aggregate revenue per peripheral product was flat during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996 compared with the same periods in 1995. The average revenue per Macintosh and per peripheral unit will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including industrywide pricing pressures and increased competition. International net sales represented 52% of net sales in 1996 compared with 48% of net sales in 1995. International net sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing 3%, 11% and 13% during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the same periods in 1995. Net sales in European markets trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996 compared with the same periods in 1995, as a result of a decrease in Macintosh and peripheral unit sales, partially offset by an increase in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh and per peripheral unit, primarily during the first part of the year. Net sales in Japan trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing during the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996 compared with the same periods in 1995. An increase in Macintosh unit sales during these periods was more than offset by a decrease in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh and per peripheral unit and a decrease in peripheral unit sales. Domestic net sales trended downward beginning in the second quarter of 1996, decreasing by 18%, 26%, and 30% for the twelve, nine, and three months ended September 27, 1996, respectively, compared with the corresponding periods in 1995, resulting from a decline or lack of growth in demand for all product families. According to an industry source, in the fourth quarter of 1996 compared with the fourth quarter of 1995, the Company's share of the worldwide and U.S. personal computer markets declined to 5.4% from 8.7%, and to 7.3% from 13.2%, respectively. Net sales increased $1,873 million, or 20%, in 1995 over 1994, primarily due to a combination of unit growth, higher average selling prices, and changes in currency exchange rates. Total Macintosh computer unit sales increased approximately 15% over the prior year. This unit sales growth resulted principally from strong sales of the Company's Power Macintosh(registered trademark) products, which accounted for more than 70% of total unit shipments during the fourth quarter of 1995, compared with 26% in the comparable period of 1994, and from sales of newer product offerings within the Performa(registered trademark) family of desktop personal computers. This unit growth was partially offset by declining unit sales of certain of the Company's older product offerings. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit increased 12% in 1995 compared with 1994, primarily due to a shift in product mix toward the Company's newer products and products with multimedia configurations. International net sales represented 48% of net sales in 1995 compared with 46% of net sales in 1994. International net sales grew 25% in 1995 from 1994, primarily reflecting strong net sales growth in the Pacific region, particularly Japan. Domestic net sales increased 16% in 1995 over 1994. In general, the Company's resellers purchase products on an as-needed basis. Resellers frequently change delivery schedules and order rates depending on changing market conditions. Unfilled orders ('backlog') can be, and often are, canceled at will. The Company attempts to fill orders on the requested delivery schedules. However, products may be in relatively short supply from time to time until production volumes have reached a level sufficient to meet demand or if other production or fulfillment constraints exist. The Company's backlog was approximately $563 million at November 29, 1996, and consisted primarily of the Company's PowerBook products, as well as higher-end Power Macintosh products. In the Company's experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following introduction of new products because of overordering by dealers anticipating shortages. Backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, as well as other factors affecting the Company's backlog, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company's future revenue or financial performance. The Company believes that net sales will remain below the level of the prior year's comparable periods through at least the first quarter of 1997, if not later. In addition, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to achieve sales levels in the first quarter of 1997 comparable to the levels achieved in the fourth quarter of 1996. Gross Margin Gross margin represents the difference between the Company's net sales and its cost of goods sold. The amount of revenue generated by the sale of products is influenced principally by the price set by the Company for its products relative to competitive products. The cost of goods sold is based primarily on the cost of components and, to a lesser extent, direct labor costs. The type and cost of components included in particular configurations of the Company's products (such as memory and disk drives) are often directly related to the need to market products in configurations competitive with those of other manufacturers. Competition in the personal computer industry is intense, and in the short term, frequent changes in pricing and product configuration are often necessary in order to remain competitive. Accordingly, gross margin as a percentage of net sales can be significantly influenced in the short term by actions undertaken by the Company in response to industrywide competitive pressures. Gross margin decreased to 9.8% in 1996 compared with 25.8% in 1995. This decrease is primarily the result of a $616 million charge in the second quarter of 1996 for the write-down of certain inventory, as well as the costs to cancel excess component orders, necessitated by significantly lower than expected demand for many of the Company's products, primarily its entry-level products. Also, the Company separately incurred approximately $145 million in charges during the last nine months of 1996 to provide for the estimated costs to correct certain quality problems in certain entry-level, Performa, PowerBook and peripheral products, covering both goods held in inventory and shipped goods. The Company also incurred greater warranty expenses per unit sold during 1996 compared with 1995. In addition, this decrease in gross margins is due to the Company's response to extreme competitive actions by other companies attempting to gain market share, including the Company's pricing actions in the United States, Japan and Europe across most product lines, which were partially offset by a decrease in the cost of certain product components. In the first quarter of 1997, the Company took, and the Company expects that it will continue to take, similar pricing actions with respect to a number of product lines. The decrease in gross margin levels was slightly offset by hedging gains, net of the effects of a stronger U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies. The Company's operating and pricing strategies take into account changes in exchange rates over time; however, the Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short term by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Gross margin increased both in amount and as a percentage of net sales in 1995 compared with 1994. The increase in gross margin as a percentage of net sales was primarily a result of a shift in product mix toward the Company's newer, high-margin products, which included strong sales of certain products within the Company's Power Macintosh family of personal computers and its Macintosh Performa family. The increase in gross margin levels was affected favorably by changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of a weaker U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies in 1995 compared with 1994. Although gross margin for 1996 was 9.8%, it improved to 22.0% during the fourth quarter, primarily as a result of lower component costs, sales of fully reserved product, and a shift in product mix toward the Company's newer products and products with multimedia configurations, which tend to have higher margins. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to sustain the gross margin level achieved in the fourth quarter. Gross margins will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued industrywide pricing pressures, increased competition, and compressed product life cycles. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company's ability to effectively manage quality problems and warranty costs, and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. Research and development expenditures decreased slightly in 1996 when compared with 1995, primarily due to the termination of certain third-party joint development efforts. The increase as a percentage of net sales resulted from a decrease in the level of net sales. The increase in research and development expenditures during 1995 compared with 1994 reflected higher project- and headcount-related spending. The decrease as a percentage of net sales was the result of revenue growth in 1995 over 1994. The Company believes that continued investments in research and development are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to continued, timely development of new and enhanced products. The Company believes that research and development expenditures in 1997 will be comparable to those in 1996. Selling, general and administrative expenses remained relatively flat, but increased as a percentage of net sales, in 1996 compared with 1995. The increase as a percentage of net sales in 1996 when compared with 1995 was the result of reduced net sales. In 1995, selling, general and administrative expenses increased as a result of increased advertising and channel marketing programs. The decrease as a percentage of net sales was primarily the result of the sales growth in 1995 over 1994. As a result of its restructuring plan, the Company expects that selling, general and administrative expenditures in 1997 will decrease compared with 1996 levels. Restructuring Costs For information regarding the Company's restructuring actions, refer to page 39 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Interest and other income (expense), net, increased to $88 million in income in 1996 from $10 million in expense in 1995. This $98 million favorable change is primarily composed of a favorable variance of $78 million related to net realized and unrealized foreign exchange hedging gains, and lower foreign exchange hedging costs, primarily as a result of lower market and option volatility, higher U.S. interest rates compared with rates abroad, and reduced foreign currency cash flows; an increase of $73 million related to realized gains on the sale of most of the Company's available-for-sale and other equity securities during 1996; offset by a $52 million unfavorable variance related to interest income (expense), as a result of higher average debt balances and lower average cash balances during the year, and an overall decline in average interest rate yields. In addition, the Company's cost of funds has increased as a result of the downgrading from January 1996 through May 1996 of its short-term debt to NP and C by Moody's Investor Services and Standard and Poor's Rating Agency, respectively, and of its long-term debt to B1 and B+ by Moody's Investor Services and Standard and Poor's Rating Agency, respectively. In 1995, interest and other income (expense), net, decreased to $10 million in expense from $22 million in expense in 1994. This $12 million favorable change was primarily composed of $49 million in interest income (expense) attributable to higher average cash balances, higher interest rates, and interest rate hedging gains, offset in part by a $36 million unfavorable variance related to realized and unrealized foreign exchange hedging losses and foreign exchange hedging costs. Market volatility and higher foreign currency balances accounted for the increased hedging costs. For a summary of the Company's interest and other income (expense), net, refer to page 37 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For more information regarding the Company's strategy and accounting for financial instruments, refer to pages 33 - 36 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For more information regarding the Company's notes payable to banks and long-term debt, refer to pages 36 - 37 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. At September 27, 1996, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $487 million before being offset against certain deferred tax liabilities for presentation on the Company's balance sheet. A substantial portion of this asset is realizable based on the ability to offset existing deferred tax liabilities. Realization of approximately $85 million of the asset is dependent on the Company's ability to generate approximately $245 million of future U.S. taxable income. Management believes that it is more likely than not that the asset will be realized based on forecasted U.S. income. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will meet its expectations of future U.S. income. As a result, the amount of the deferred tax assets considered realizable could be reduced in the near and long term if estimates of future taxable U.S. income are reduced. Such an occurrence could materially adversely affect the Company's financial results and condition. The Company will continue to evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for a valuation allowance. For additional information regarding income taxes, refer to pages 40 - 41 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition The Company's future operating results and financial condition are dependent on the Company's ability to successfully develop, manufacture, and market technologically innovative products in order to meet dynamic customer demand patterns. Inherent in this process are a number of factors that the Company must successfully manage in order to achieve favorable future operating results and financial condition. Potential risks and uncertainties that could affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition include, without limitation, continued competitive pressures in the marketplace and the effect of any reaction by the Company to such competitive pressures, including pricing actions by the Company; the ability of the Company to make timely delivery to the marketplace of successful technological innovations; the effects of significant adverse publicity; the Company's ability to supply products in certain categories; and uncertainties concerning the Company's ability to successfully implement its new strategic direction and restructuring actions. The Company expects that it will not return to sustained profitability until at least the second quarter of 1997, if not later. Restructuring of Operations During 1996, the Company began to implement certain restructuring actions aimed at reducing its cost structure, improving its competitiveness, and restoring sustained profitability. There are several risks inherent in the Company's efforts to transition to a new cost structure. These include the risk that the Company will not be able to reduce expenditures quickly enough to restore sustained profitability and the risk that cost-cutting initiatives will impair the Company's ability to innovate and remain competitive in the computer industry. As part of its restructuring effort, the Company has begun to implement a new business model. Implementation of the new business model involves several risks, including the risk that by simplifying its product line the Company will increase its dependence on fewer products, potentially reduce overall sales, and increase its reliance on unproven products and technology. Another risk of the new business model is that by increasing the proportion of the Company's products to be manufactured under outsourcing arrangements, the Company could lose control of the quality or quantity of the products manufactured, or lose the flexibility to make timely changes in production schedules in order to respond to changing market conditions. In addition, the new business model could adversely affect employee morale, thereby damaging the Company's ability to retain and motivate employees. Also, because the new business model contemplates that the Company will rely to a greater extent on collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, the Company will have less direct control over certain of its research and development efforts, and its ability to create innovative new products may be reduced. Finally, even if the new business model is successfully implemented, there can be no assurance that it will effectively resolve the various issues currently facing the Company. In addition, although the Company believes that the actions it is taking under its restructuring plan should help restore marketplace confidence in the Macintosh platform, there can be no assurance that such actions will be successful. For the foregoing reasons there can be no assurance that the current restructuring actions will achieve their goals or that similar actions will not be required in the future. The Company's future operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected should it encounter difficulty in effectively managing the transition to the new business model and cost structure. For more information regarding the Company's restructuring actions initiated in the second quarter of 1996, refer to page 39 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Product Introductions and Transitions Due to the highly volatile nature of the personal computer industry, which is characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company frequently introduces new products and product enhancements. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance, the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with product transitions, the availability of application software for new products, the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, the availability of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand, and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. In addition, although the number of new product introductions may decrease under the Company's new business model, the risks and uncertainties associated with new product introductions may increase as the Company refocuses its product offerings on key growth segments. The rate of product shipments immediately following introduction of a new product is not necessarily an indication of the future rate of shipments for that product, which depends on many factors, some of which are not under the control of the Company. These factors may include initial large purchases by a small segment of the user population that tends to purchase new technology prior to its acceptance by the majority of users ("early adopters"); purchases in satisfaction of pent-up demand by users who anticipated new technology and, as a result, deferred purchases of other products; and overordering by dealers who anticipate shortages due to the aforementioned factors. These factors may be offset by others, such as the deferral of purchases by many users until new technology is accepted as "proven" and for which commonly used software products are available; and the reduction of orders by dealers once they believe they can obtain sufficient supply of products previously in backlog. Backlog is often volatile after new product introductions due to the aforementioned demand factors, often increasing coincident with introduction, and then decreasing once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply of the new products. The measurement of demand for newly introduced products is further complicated by the availability of different product configurations, which may include various types of built-in peripherals and software. Configurations may also require certain localization (such as language) for various markets and, as a result, demand in different geographic areas may be a function of the availability of third-party software in those localized versions. For example, the availability of European-language versions of software products manufactured by U.S. producers may lag behind the availability of U.S. versions by a quarter or more. This may result in lower initial demand for the Company's new products outside the United States, even though localized versions of the Company's products may be available. The increasing integration of functions and complexity of operations of the Company's products also increase the risk that latent defects or other faults could be discovered by customers or end-users after volumes of products have been produced or shipped. If such defects were significant, the Company could incur material recall and replacement costs under product warranties. Competition The personal computer industry is highly competitive and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new products, short product life cycles, continual improvement in product price/performance characteristics, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a large number of competitors. During 1996, the Company's results of operations and financial condition were, and in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by industrywide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross margins. The industry has also been characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality and hardware performance and features based on existing or emerging industry standards. Many of the Company's competitors have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources; broader product lines; and larger installed customer bases than those of the Company. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by overall demand for personal computers and general customer preferences for one platform over another or one set of product features over another. The Company is currently the primary maker of hardware that uses the Macintosh operating system ("Mac(registered trademark) OS"). The Mac OS has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers that run the MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows operating systems. The Company believes that the Mac OS, with its perceived advantages over MS-DOS and Windows, has been a driving force behind sales of the Company's personal computer hardware for the past several years. Recent innovations in the Windows platform, including those introduced by Windows 95, have added features to the Windows platform similar to those offered by the Mac OS. The Company is currently taking and will continue to take steps to respond to the competitive pressures being placed on its personal computer sales as a result of the recent innovations in the Windows platform. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by its ability to maintain and increase the installed base for the Macintosh platform. The Company recently announced a new strategy with respect to updating its operating system while redesigning its plan for a next- generation operating system. To extend the life of its current operating system, the Company intends to issue periodic releases consisting of discrete operating system components. The Company expects that this will enable it to introduce some new functionality for the current operating system sooner than it would be able to introduce a completely new operating system. Concurrently, the Company will continue development of its next-generation operating system, focusing on increased functionality at the possible expense of some backward compatibility. Diminished backward compatibility in its new operating system could result in a loss of existing customers. Inability to introduce a next- generation operating system on a timely basis, or to gain developer support and market accepatance for it, may have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and financial condition. As part of its efforts to increase the installed base for the Macintosh platform, the Company announced the licensing of the Mac OS to other personal computer vendors in January 1995, as well as an additional licensing initiative in 1996. Several vendors currently sell products that utilize the Macintosh operating system. The Company believes that licensing the operating system will result in a broader installed base on which software vendors can develop and provide technical innovations for the Macintosh platform. However, there can be no assurance that the installed base will be broadened by the licensing of the operating system or that licensing will result in an increase in the number of application software titles or the rate at which vendors will bring to market application software based on the Mac OS. In addition, as a result of licensing its operating system, the Company is forced to compete with other companies producing Mac OS-based computer systems. The benefits to the Company from licensing the Mac OS to third parties may be more than offset by the disadvantages of being required to compete with them. As a supplemental means of addressing the competition from MS-DOS and Windows, the Company has devoted substantial resources toward developing personal computer products capable of running application software designed for the MS-DOS or Windows operating systems ("Cross-Platform Products"). These products include the RISC-based PowerPC(trademark) microprocessor and either include the Pentium or 586-class microprocessor or can accommodate an add-on card containing a Pentium or 586-class microprocessor. These products enable users to run concurrently applications that require the Mac OS, MS-DOS, Windows 3.1, or Windows 95 operating systems. Depending on customer demand, the Company may supply customers who purchase Cross-Platform Products with Windows operating system software under licensing agreements with Microsoft. However, in order to do so, the Company will need to enter into one or more agreements with certain Microsoft distributors. The Company, International Business Machines Corporation ("IBM") and Motorola, Inc. have agreed upon and announced the availability of specifications for a PowerPC microprocessor-based hardware reference platform. These specifications define a "unified" personal computer architecture that gives access to both the Power Macintosh platform and the PC environment. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by its ability to continue to implement this agreement and to manage the risk associated with the transition to this new hardware reference platform. Decisions by customers to purchase the Company's personal computers, as opposed to MS-DOS or Windows-based systems, are often based on the availability of third-party software for particular applications. The Company believes that the availability of third-party application software for the Company's hardware products depends in part on third-party developers' perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining, and upgrading such software for the Company's products versus software for the larger MS-DOS and Windows market. This analysis is based on factors such as the perceived strength of the Company and its products, the anticipated potential revenue that may be generated, and the costs of developing such software products. To the extent the Company's recent financial losses and declining demand for the Company's product have caused software developers to question the Company's position in the personal computer market, developers could be less inclined to develop new application software or upgrade existing software for the Company's products and more inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for the larger MS-DOS and Windows market. Microsoft Corporation is an important developer of application software for the Company's products. Accordingly, Microsoft's interest in producing application software for the Company's products may be influenced by Microsoft's perception of its interests as the vendor of the Windows operating systems. The Company's ability to produce and market competitive products is also dependent on the ability of IBM and Motorola, Inc., the suppliers of the PowerPC RISC microprocessor for certain of the Company's products, to supply to the Company in adequate numbers microprocessors that produce superior price/performance results compared with those supplied to the Company's competitors by Intel Corporation, the developer and producer of the microprocessors used by most personal computers using the MS- DOS and Windows operating systems. IBM produces personal computers based on Intel microprocessors as well as workstations based on the PowerPC microprocessor, and is also the developer of OS/2, a competing operating system to the Company's Mac OS. Accordingly, IBM's interest in supplying the Company with microprocessors for the Company's products may be influenced by IBM's perception of its interests as a competing manufacturer of personal computers and as a competing operating system vendor. Several competitors of the Company, including Compaq, IBM, and Microsoft, have either targeted or announced their intention to target certain of the Company's key market segments, including education and publishing. Many of these companies have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources than the Company. The Company is integrating Internet capabilities into its new and existing hardware and software platforms. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to continue to do so successfully. In addition, the Internet market is rapidly evolving and is characterized by an increasing number of market entrants who have introduced or developed products addressing access to, authoring for, or communication over, the Internet. Many of these competitors have a significant lead over the Company in developing products for the Internet, have significantly greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources than the Company, or both. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be affected by the Company's ability to successfully expand and capitalize on its investments in other markets, such as the markets for MessagePad (registered trademark) and related products. Global Market Risks A large portion of the Company's revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company's operations and financial results could be significantly affected by international factors, such as changes in foreign currency exchange rates or weak economic conditions in the foreign markets in which the Company distributes its products. When the U.S. dollar strengthens against other currencies, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based sales decreases. When the U.S. dollar weakens, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based sales increases. Correspondingly, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based costs increases when the U.S. dollar weakens and decreases when the U.S. dollar strengthens. Overall, the Company is a net receiver of currencies other than the U.S. dollar and, as such, benefits from a weaker dollar and is adversely affected by a stronger dollar relative to major currencies worldwide. Accordingly, changes in exchange rates, and in particular a strengthening of the U.S. dollar, may negatively affect the Company's consolidated sales and gross margins (as expressed in U.S. dollars). To mitigate the short-term impact of fluctuating currency exchange rates on the Company's non-U.S. dollar-based sales, product procurement, and operating expenses, the Company regularly hedges its non-U.S. dollar- based exposures. Specifically, the Company enters into foreign exchange forward and option contracts to hedge firmly committed transactions. Currently, hedges of firmly committed transactions do not extend beyond one year. The Company also purchases foreign exchange option contracts to hedge certain other probable but not firmly committed transactions. Hedges of probable but not firmly committed transactions currently do not extend beyond one year. To reduce the costs associated with these ongoing foreign exchange hedging programs, the Company also regularly sells foreign exchange option contracts and enters into certain other foreign exchange transactions. All foreign exchange forward and option contracts not accounted for as hedges, including all transactions intended to reduce the costs associated with the Company's foreign exchange hedging programs, are carried at fair value and are adjusted on each balance sheet date for changes in exchange rates. While the Company is exposed with respect to fluctuations in the interest rates of many of the world's leading industrialized countries, the Company's interest income and expense is most sensitive to fluctuations in the general level of U.S. interest rates. In this regard, changes in U.S. interest rates affect the interest earned on the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments as well as interest paid on its notes payable to banks and long-term debt. To mitigate the impact of fluctuations in U.S. interest rates, the Company has entered into interest rate swap, collar, and floor transactions. Certain of these transactions are intended to better match the Company's floating-rate interest income on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments with the fixed-rate interest expense on its long-term debt. The Company also enters into these transactions in order to diversify a portion of the Company's exposure away from fluctuations in short-term U.S. interest rates. These instruments may extend the Company's cash investment horizon up to a maximum duration of three years. To ensure the adequacy and effectiveness of the Company's foreign exchange and interest rate hedge positions, as well as to monitor the risks and opportunities of the nonhedge portfolios, the Company continually monitors its foreign exchange forward and option positions, and its interest rate swap, option and floor positions both on a stand-alone basis and in conjunction with its underlying foreign currency- and interest rate-related exposures, respectively, from both an accounting and an economic perspective. However, given the effective horizons of the Company's risk management activities, there can be no assurance that the aforementioned programs will offset more than a portion of the adverse financial impact resulting from unfavorable movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. In addition, the timing of the accounting for recognition of gains and losses related to mark-to-market instruments for any given period may not coincide with the timing of gains and losses related to the underlying economic exposures and, therefore, may adversely affect the Company's operating results and financial position. The Company generally does not engage in leveraged hedging. The Company's current financial condition may have an impact on the costs of its hedging transactions, as well as the willingness of its financial counter-parties to enter into hedging transactions with the Company. Inventory and Supply In line with the Company's efforts to redesign its business model, the Company is taking steps to streamline its product portfolios in its key usage areas in education, business, and the home. This planned simplification of product lines has resulted in inventory reserves. Cancelation fees related to custom component inventory purchased for anticipated product introductions that have been canceled have also been paid or accrued. The Company has also separately provided for the estimated cost to correct certain quality problems in certain entry-level, Performa, PowerBook, and peripheral products. Although the Company believes its inventory and related reserves are adequate, no assurance can be given that the Company will not incur additional inventory and related charges. The Company must order components for its products and build inventory well in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there is a risk that the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce excess or insufficient inventories of particular products. The Company's operating results and financial condition have been and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. Certain of the Company's products are manufactured in whole or in part by third-party manufacturers, either pursuant to design specifications of the Company or otherwise. As a result of the Company's restructuring actions, which include the sale of the Company's Fountain, Colorado, manufacturing facility to SCI Systems, Inc. ("SCI") and a related manufacturing outsourcing agreement with SCI, the proportion of the Company's products produced and distributed under outsourcing arrangements will increase. While outsourcing arrangements may lower the fixed cost of operations, they will also reduce the direct control the Company has over production. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the products manufactured, or the flexibility of the Company to respond to changing market conditions. Furthermore, any efforts by the Company to manage its inventory under outsourcing arrangements could subject the Company to liquidated damages or cancelation of the arrangement. Moreover, although arrangements with such manufacturers may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company remains at least initially responsible to the ultimate consumer for warranty service. Accordingly, in the event of product defects or warranty liability, the Company may remain primarily liable. Any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with contract manufacturers or otherwise, could adversely affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition. The Company's ability to satisfy demand for its products may be limited by the availability of key components. The Company has experienced some limitations in supply of certain microprocessors in the first quarter of 1996. The Company believes that the availability from suppliers to the personal computer industry of microprocessors and ASICs presents the most significant potential for constraining the Company's ability to produce products. Specific microprocessors manufactured by IBM and Motorola, Inc. are currently available only from single sources, while some advanced microprocessors are currently in the early stages of ramp-up for production and thus have limited availability. The Company and other producers in the personal computer industry also compete for other semiconductor products with other industries that have experienced increased demand for such products, due to either increased consumer demand or increased use of semiconductors in their products (such as the cellular phone and automotive industries). Finally, the Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry (including certain microprocessors and ASICs). Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of common components instead of components customized to meet the Company's requirements. Such product supply constraints and corresponding increased costs could decrease the Company's net sales and adversely affect the Company's operating results and financial condition. Marketing and Distribution A number of uncertainties may affect the marketing and distribution of the Company's products. Currently, the Company's primary means of distribution is through third-party computer resellers. Such resellers include consumer channels such as mass-merchandise stores, consumer electronics outlets, and computer superstores. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakened or if resellers within consumer channels were to decide not to continue to distribute the Company's products. Uncertainty over demand for the Company's products may cause resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company's products. Under the Company's arrangements with its resellers, resellers have the option to reduce or eliminate unfilled orders previously placed, in most instances without financial penalty. Resellers also have the option to return products to the Company without penalty within certain limits, beyond which they may be assessed fees. The Company has recently experienced a reduction in ordering from historical levels by resellers due to uncertainty concerning the Company's condition and prospects. Other Factors The majority of the Company's research and development activities, its corporate headquarters, and other critical business operations, including certain major vendors, are located near major seismic faults. The Company's operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected in the event of a major earthquake. Production and marketing of products in certain states and countries may subject the Company to environmental and other regulations which include, in some instances, the requirement that the Company provide consumers with the ability to return to the Company product at the end of its useful life, and leave responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or recycling with the Company. It is unclear what effect such regulation will have on the Company's future operating results and financial condition. The Company is currently in the process of replacing its existing transaction systems (which include order management, product procurement, distribution, and finance) with a single integrated system as part of its ongoing effort to increase operational efficiency. The Company's future operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected if the Company is unable to implement and effectively manage the transition to this new integrated system. As part of the Company's restructuring plan, the Company sold its Napa, California, data center to MCI Systemhouse ("MCI"), and entered into a data processing outsourcing agreement with MCI. While this outsourcing agreement may lower the Company's fixed costs of operations, it will also reduce the direct control the Company has over its data processing. It is uncertain what effect such diminished control will have on the Company's data processing. Because of the foregoing factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company's operating results and financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. In addition, the Company's participation in a highly dynamic industry often results in significant volatility of the Company's common stock price. Liquidity and Capital Resources The Company's financial position with respect to cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, net of notes payable to banks, increased to $1,559 million at September 27, 1996, from $491 million at September 29, 1995. The Company's financial position with respect to cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased to $1,745 million at September 27, 1996, from $952 million at September 29, 1995. The Company's cash and cash equivalent balance at September 27, 1996, includes $177 million pledged as collateral to support letters of credit primarily associated with the Company's purchase commitments under the terms of the sale of the Company's Fountain, Colorado, manufacturing facility to SCI. The Company's cash and cash equivalent balance at September 29, 1995, includes $90 million pledged as collateral to support notes payable to banks. Cash generated by operations during 1996 totaled $519 million. Cash generated by operations was primarily the result of decreases in inventories and accounts receivable, partially offset by decreases in accounts payable and deferred tax liabilities. As part of the Company's restructuring plan and in order to meet certain liquidity requirements during 1996, the Company generated $145 million of cash from the sale of certain equity investments, and the sale of the Fountain, Colorado, manufacturing facility to SCI and the Napa, California, data center to MCI. The Company expects that cash generated from the sale of equity investments and property, plant and equipment will be significantly less in 1997 compared with 1996. Net cash used for the purchase of property, plant, and equipment totaled $67 million in 1996, and consisted primarily of increases in manufacturing machinery and equipment. The Company expects that the level of capital expenditures in 1997 will be comparable to 1996. Notes payable to banks at September 27, 1996, were approximately $275 million lower than at September 29, 1995. During 1996, an outstanding loan to Apple Computer B.V., a subsidiary of the Company, was repaid in full. At September 27, 1996, Apple Japan, Inc., a subsidiary of the Company, held $186 million of notes payable to several banks, with maturity dates ranging from the end of December 1996 to May 1997. The majority of these loans are guaranteed by the Company. The Company's balance of long-term debt increased during 1996 due to the issuance of $661 million aggregate principal amount of 6% unsecured convertible subordinated notes to certain qualified parties in a private placement. These notes were sold at 100% of par. These notes pay interest semi-annually and mature on June 1, 2001. The remainder of long-term borrowings consists of $300 million aggregate principal amount of 6.5% unsecured notes issued under an omnibus shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in 1994. The notes were sold at 99.925% of par, for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. The notes pay interest semi-annually and mature on February 15, 2004. For more information regarding the Company's long-term debt, refer to pages XX-XX of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Internal Revenue Service has proposed federal income tax deficiencies for the years 1984 through 1991, and the Company has made certain prepayments thereon. The Company contested the proposed deficiencies for the years 1984 through 1988, and most of the issues in dispute for these years have been resolved. On June 29, 1995, the IRS issued a notice of deficiency proposing increases to the amount of the Company's federal income taxes for the years 1989 through 1991. The Company has filed a petition with the United States Tax Court to contest these alleged tax deficiencies. Management believes that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from these tax examinations. The Company's cost of funds has increased as a result of the downgrading from January 1996 through May 1996 of its short-term debt to NP and C by Moody's Investor Services and Standard and Poor's Rating Agency, respectively, and of its long-term debt to B1 and B+ by Moody's Investor Services and Standard and Poor's Rating Agency, respectively. In addition, the Company may be required to pledge additional collateral with respect to certain of its borrowings and letters of credit and to agree to more stringent covenants than in the past. The Company believes that its balances of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, together with continued short-term borrowings from banks, will be sufficient to meet its operating and other cash requirements, including the impact of planned restructuring actions, on a short- and long-term basis. No assurance can be given that short-term borrowings from banks can be continued, or that any additional required financing could be obtained should the restructuring plan take longer to implement than anticipated or be unsuccessful. If the Company is unable to obtain such financing, its liquidity, results of operations, and financial condition could be materially adversely affected. Item 8. Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. All information is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. (Tabular information: Dollars in millions, except per share amounts) Results of Operations 1995 Change 1994 Change 1993 Net sales $ 11,062 20% $ 9,189 15% $ 7,977 Gross margin $ 2,858 22% $ 2,343 -14% $ 2,728 Percentage of net sales 25.8% 25.5% 34.2% Research and development $ 614 9% $ 564 -15% $ 665 Percentage of net sales 5.6% 6.1% 8.3% Selling, general and administrative $ 1,583 14% $ 1,384 -15% $ 1,632 Percentage of net sales 14.3% 15.1% 20.5% Operating expenses (excluding restructuring costs) $ 2,197 13% $ 1,948 -15% $ 2,297 Percentage of net sales 19.9% 21.2% 28.8% Restructuring costs $ (23) -82% $ (127) -140% $ 321 Percentage of net sales (0.2%) (1.4%) 4.0% Interest and other income (expense), net $ (10) 55% $ (22) -175% $ 30 Net income $ 424 37% $ 310 258% $ 87 Earnings per share $ 3.45 32% $ 2.61 258% $ 0.73 Net Sales Net sales increased $1,873 million, or 20%, in fiscal 1995, compared with an increase of $1,212 million, or 15%, in fiscal 1994. The net sales growth in 1995 over 1994 was primarily due to a combination of unit growth, higher average selling prices, and changes in currency exchange rates. Total Macintosh computer unit sales increased approximately 15% over the prior year. This unit sales growth resulted principally from strong sales of the Company's Power Macintosh products, which accounted for over 70% of total unit shipments at the end of the fourth quarter of 1995, compared with 26% in the comparable period of 1994, and from sales of newer product offerings within the Performa family of desktop personal computers. This unit growth was partially offset by declining unit sales of certain of the Company's older product offerings. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit increased 12% in 1995 compared with 1994, primarily due to a shift in product mix toward the Company's newer products and products with multimedia configurations. The net sales growth in 1994 over 1993 was primarily due to two factors: unit sales growth and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh computer unit. Total Macintosh computer unit sales increased 16% over the prior year. This growth resulted principally from strong sales of the Company's new Power Macintosh products and of newer product offerings within the Macintosh Performa family of desktop personal computers and, to a lesser extent, from sales of products within the PowerBook family of notebook personal computers. This growth was partially offset by declining unit sales in certain of the Company's more established products and older product versions. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit increased slightly, primarily due to fluctuations in product mix throughout the year, despite pricing actions undertaken by the Company in response to continuing industrywide pricing pressures. International net sales grew 25% from 1994 to 1995, primarily reflecting strong net sales growth in the Pacific region, particularly Japan, and favorable changes in currency exchange rates. Net sales grew moderately in Europe over the same period. International net sales grew 17% from 1993 to 1994, primarily reflecting strong net sales growth in the Pacific region, particularly Japan. International net sales represented 48% of net sales in 1995 compared with 46% of net sales in 1994 and 45% of net sales in 1993. Domestic net sales grew 16% over the prior year, compared with an increase of 14% in 1994 over 1993, primarily resulting from strong growth in the education and consumer markets. In general, the Company's resellers typically purchase products on an as- needed basis. Resellers frequently change delivery schedules and order rates depending on changing market conditions. Unfilled orders ("backlog") can be, and often are, canceled at will. The Company attempts to fill orders on the requested delivery schedules. However, products may be in relatively short supply from time to time until production volumes have reached a level sufficient to meet demand or if other production or fulfillment constraints exist. The Company's backlog was approximately $618 million at December 1, 1995, consisting primarily of the Company's higher-end Power Macintosh products. In the Company's experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog often increases in anticipation of or immediately following introduction of new products because of overordering by dealers anticipating shortages. Backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply. Because of the foregoing, as well as other factors affecting the Company's backlog, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company's future revenue or financial performance. For further information regarding the Company's backlog, refer to page 13 of Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations under the heading "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition." Gross Margin Gross margin represents the difference between the Company's net sales and its cost of goods sold. The amount of revenue generated by the sale of products is influenced principally by the price set by the Company for its products relative to competitive products. The cost of goods sold is based primarily on the cost of components and, to a lesser extent, direct labor costs. The type and cost of components included in particular configurations of the Company's products (such as memory and disk drives) are often directly related to the need to market products in configurations competitive with those of other manufacturers. Competition in the personal computer industry is intense, and in the short term, frequent changes in pricing and product configuration are often necessary in order to remain competitive. Accordingly, gross margin as a percentage of net sales can be significantly influenced in the short term by actions undertaken by the Company in response to industrywide competitive pressures. Gross margin increased both in amount and as a percentage of net sales in 1995 compared with 1994. The increase in gross margin as a percentage of net sales was primarily a result of a shift in product mix toward the Company's newer, high-margin products, which included strong sales of certain products within the Company's Power Macintosh family of personal computers and its entry-level Macintosh Performa family. The increase in gross margin levels was affected favorably by changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of a weaker U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies in 1995 compared with 1994. The Company's operating strategy and pricing take into account changes in exchange rates over time; however, the Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short term by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Gross margin in 1994 declined as a percentage of net sales from 1993 levels. The downward trend in gross margin as a percentage of net sales was primarily a result of pricing and promotional actions undertaken by the Company in response to industrywide competitive pricing pressures. Gross margin was also affected somewhat adversely by changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of a stronger U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies in 1994 compared with 1993. Results from the Company's ongoing foreign currency hedging activities offset a portion of this adverse foreign currency impact on gross margin. Although the Company's gross margin percentage was 25.8% in 1995, gross margin as a percentage of net sales declined to 20.7% in the fourth quarter of 1995, primarily due to aggressive pricing actions and product mix issues related to component availability and delays in new PowerPC processor-based product production. It is anticipated that gross margins will continue to remain under significant pressure and are likely to remain comparable to the level reported for the fourth quarter of 1995 due to a variety of factors, including continued industrywide pricing pressures, increased competition, particularly in Japan, and compressed product life cycles. Research and Development Research and development expenditures increased in amount during 1995 when compared with 1994, primarily due to higher project- and headcount- related spending, as the Company continues to invest in the development of new products and technologies. The decrease in research and development expenditures during 1994 compared with 1993 reflected the results of the Company's restructuring actions aimed at reducing costs, including product development expenditures. Research and development expenditures as a percentage of net sales have continued to decrease since 1993 as a result of revenue growth during 1994 and 1995, coupled with the Company's continuing efforts to focus its research and development project spending in an efficient manner. The Company believes that continued focused investment in research and development is critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace, and is directly related to continued, timely development of new and enhanced products. Selling, General and Administrative Selling, general and administrative expenses increased in amount, but decreased as a percentage of net sales, in 1995 compared with 1994. This increase in expense was primarily a result of increased advertising and channel marketing program spending as the Company continued its efforts to expand its market share. Although the Company has increased its selling and marketing expenses in an effort to expand its market share, there can be no assurance that such an increase in spending will result in a corresponding increase in market share. The decrease as a percentage of net sales since 1993 is primarily a result of revenue growth during 1994 and 1995, combined with the Company's ongoing efforts to manage total operating expense growth. In 1994, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in amount and as a percentage of net sales compared with 1993, primarily because of lower employee-related and facilities costs resulting from the restructuring actions taken in the third quarter of 1993. Revenue growth in 1994 also contributed to the decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales. The Company will continue to face the challenge of managing growth in selling, general and administrative expenses relative to gross margin levels, particularly in light of the Company's expectation of continued pressure on gross margins and continued competitive pressures worldwide. Restructuring Costs For information regarding the Company's restructuring actions, refer to pages 29 - 30 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net Interest and other income (expense), net, decreased to $10 million in expense in 1995 from $22 million in expense in 1994. This $12 million favorable change is comprised of $48 million in interest and other income attributable to higher average cash balances, higher interest rates, and interest rate hedging gains, offset in part by a $36 million unfavorable variance related to realized and unrealized foreign exchange hedging losses and foreign exchange hedging costs. Market volatility and higher foreign currency balances account for the increased hedging cost. In 1994, interest and other income (expense), net, decreased to $22 million in expense from $30 million of income in 1993, resulting in a $52 million unfavorable change. Higher interest rates and larger average borrowing balances used to fund working capital needs served to significantly increase interest expense, and accounted for $28 million of the $52 million change during 1994. Other factors contributing to this variance included interest income, which was higher in 1993 than in 1994 primarily due to a $15 million interest payment received on a nonrecurring income tax refund from the Internal Revenue Service in 1993, and interest income from the Company's interest rate risk management program, which contributed $6 million in 1993, and reduced interest income by $7 million in 1994. For more information regarding the Company's strategy and accounting for financial and other derivative instruments, refer to pages 26 - 28 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Provision for Income Taxes 1995 Change 1994 Change 1993 Provision for income taxes $ 250 32% $ 190 258% $ 53 Effective tax rate 37% 38% 38% The Company's effective tax rate decreased to 37% in 1995 compared with a rate of 38% in 1994 and 1993. For additional information regarding income taxes, refer to pages 31 - 32 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition The Company's future operating results and financial condition are dependent on the Company's ability to successfully develop, manufacture, and market technologically innovative products in order to meet dynamic customer demand patterns. Inherent in this process are a number of factors that the Company must successfully manage in order to achieve favorable future operating results and financial condition. Product Introductions and Transitions Due to the highly volatile nature of the personal computer industry, which is characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company frequently introduces new products and product enhancements. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance, the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with product transitions, the availability of application software for new products, the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, and the manufacturing of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. In 1994, the Company introduced Power Macintosh, a new line of Macintosh computers based on a new PowerPC family of RISC microprocessors. The Company's results of operations and financial condition may be adversely affected if it is unable to successfully complete the transition of its lines of personal computers and servers from the Motorola 68000 series of microprocessors to the PowerPC microprocessor. The success of this ongoing transition will depend on the Company's ability to continue to sell products based on the Motorola 68000 series of microprocessors while continuing to gain market acceptance of the new PowerPC processor-based products, to successfully manage inventory levels of both product lines simultaneously, and to continue to coordinate the timely development and distribution by independent software vendors of new "native" software applications specifically designed for the PowerPC processor-based products. The rate of product shipments immediately following introduction of a new product is not necessarily an indication of the future rate of shipments for that product, which depends on many factors, some of which are not under the control of the Company. These factors may include initial large purchases by a small segment of the user population that tends to purchase new technology prior to its acceptance by the majority of users ("early adopters"); purchases in satisfaction of pent-up demand by users who anticipated new technology and as a result deferred purchases of other products; and overordering by dealers who anticipate shortages due to the aforementioned factors. The preceding may also be offset by other factors, such as the deferral of purchases by many users until new technology is accepted as "proven" and for which commonly used software products are available; and the reduction of orders by dealers once they believe they can obtain sufficient supply of product previously in backlog. Backlog is often volatile after new product introductions due to the aforementioned demand factors, often increasing coincident with introduction, and then decreasing once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply of product. The measurement of demand for newly introduced products is further complicated by the availability of different product configurations, which may include various types of built-in peripherals and software. Configurations may also require certain localization (such as language) for various markets and, as a result, demand in different geographic areas may be a function of the availability of third-party software in those localized versions. For example, the availability of European- language versions of software products manufactured by U.S. producers may lag behind the availability of U.S. versions by a quarter or more. This may result in lower initial demand for the Company's new products outside the United States, even though localized versions of the Company's products may be available. Competition The personal computer industry is highly competitive and continues to be characterized by consolidations in the hardware and software industries, aggressive pricing practices, and downward pressure on gross margins. For example, in Japan, other companies have begun to initiate extreme competitive actions in order to gain market share, and as a result, the Company has implemented incremental pricing and promotional activities. The Company's results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected should the Company be unable to effectively manage the impact of industrywide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross margins. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be affected by the Company's ability to offer customers competitive technologies while effectively managing the impact on inventory levels and the potential for customer confusion created by product proliferation. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be affected by overall demand for personal computers and general customer preferences for one platform over another or one set of product features over another. On November 7, 1994, the Company reached an agreement with IBM and Motorola, Inc. on a new hardware reference platform for the PowerPC microprocessor that is intended to deliver a much wider range of operating system and application choices for computer customers. As a result of this agreement, the Company is moving forward with its efforts to make the Macintosh operating system available on the common platform. In line with its efforts, on November 13, 1995, the Company, IBM, and Motorola, Inc. announced the availability of the "PowerPC Platform," which is a set of specifications that defines a "unified" personal computer architecture and combines the Power Macintosh platform and the PC environment. Accordingly, the Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by its ability to continue to implement this agreement and certain other collaboration agreements, and to manage the associated competitive risk. The Company is currently the primary maker of hardware that uses the Macintosh operating system, and it has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers that run the MS-DOS (registered trademark) and Microsoft Windows (trademark) operating systems. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by its ability to increase market share in its personal computer business. As part of its efforts to increase overall market share, the Company announced the licensing of the Macintosh operating system to other personal computer vendors in January 1995, and several vendors currently sell product that utilize the Macintosh operating system. The success of the Company's efforts to increase its overall market share through licensing of the Macintosh operating system will depend in part on the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with competing with companies producing Macintosh OS-based computer systems. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine the ultimate effect that licensing of the Macintosh operating system will have on its product pricing and unit sales or future operating results and financial condition. The Company believes that licensing the operating system will result in a broader installed base on which software vendors can develop and provide technical innovations for the Macintosh platform. However, there can be no assurance that the installed base will be broadened by the licensing of the operating system or that licensing will result in an increase in the number of application software titles or the rate at which vendors will bring to market application software based on the Macintosh operating system. The Company's principal competitor in producing operating system software, Microsoft Corporation, is a large, well-financed corporation which has a dominant position in various segments of the personal computer software industry. In August 1995, Microsoft Corporation released Windows 95, another of its operating system offerings. As a result of the introduction of Windows 95, the Company has taken and will continue to take steps to address the additional challenges to and competitive pressures on its efforts in developing and marketing the Company's products. Accordingly, the Company's future operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected should the Company be unable to effectively manage the competitive pressure and other challenges presented by the introduction of Windows 95. Certain of the Company's personal computer products are capable of running application software designed for the MS-DOS or Windows operating systems ("Cross-Platform Products"), through software emulation of Intel Corporation microprocessor chips by use of software specifically designed for the Company's products, either those based on the Motorola 68000 series of microprocessors or those based on the PowerPC microprocessor. The Company has also introduced products that include both the RISC- based PowerPC 601 microprocessor and the 486 DX2/66 microprocessor, which enable users to switch between the Macintosh and DOS or Windows computing environments. The Company currently supplies customers who purchase Cross-Platform Products capable of running the MS-DOS or Windows 3.1 operating system with operating system software under a licensing agreement with Microsoft. This license agreement expires on December 31, 1995 (the "Old License Agreement"). The Company has attempted to license Windows 95 software from Microsoft but has been unable to do so because of the Company's unwillingness to consent to Microsoft's demand under Microsoft's proposed license agreement (the "New License Agreement") that the Company agree not to sue Microsoft if Microsoft infringes any of the Company's patents. Microsoft has also informed the Company that it will not renew the Old License Agreement unless the Company accepts the New License Agreement. Accordingly, unless an appropriate licensing agreement is reached, upon the expiration of the Old License Agreement, the Company will be unable to supply customers with any of Microsoft's operating systems on Cross- Platform Products. Although customers could obtain copies of such software from other sources, the Company is unable to predict the effect of such a situation on the demand for Cross-Platform Products. Although Cross-Platform Products represented only a small portion of the Company's unit sales during 1995, the Company is unable to predict the effect of such a situation on the Company's future operating results. Decisions by customers to purchase the Company's personal computers, as opposed to MS-DOS or Windows-based systems, are often based on the availability of third-party software for particular applications. The Company believes that the availability of third-party application software for the Company's hardware products depends in part on the third- party developers' perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing such software for the Company's products versus software for the larger MS-DOS and Windows market. This analysis is based on factors such as the relative market share of the Company's products, the anticipated potential revenue that may be earned, and the costs of developing such software products. Microsoft Corporation is an important developer of application software for the Company's products. Accordingly, Microsoft's interest in producing application software for the Company's products may be influenced by Microsoft's perception of its interests as an operating system vendor. The Company's ability to produce and market competitive products is also dependent on the ability of IBM and Motorola, Inc., the suppliers of the PowerPC RISC microprocessor for certain of the Company's products, to continue to supply to the Company microprocessors that produce superior price/performance results compared with those supplied to the Company's competitors by Intel Corporation, the developer and producer of the microprocessors used by most personal computers using the MS-DOS and Windows operating systems. IBM produces personal computers based on the Intel microprocessors as well as on the PowerPC microprocessor, and is also the developer of OS/2, a competing operating system to the Company's Macintosh operating system. Accordingly, IBM's interest in supplying the Company with improved versions of microprocessors for the Company's products may be influenced by IBM's perception of its interests as a competing manufacturer of personal computers and as a competing operating system vendor. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be affected by the Company's ability to successfully expand and capitalize on its investments in other markets, such as the markets for Internet services and personal digital assistant (PDA) products. Global Market Risks A large portion of the Company's revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company's operations and financial results could be significantly affected by international factors, such as changes in foreign currency exchange rates or weak economic conditions in the foreign markets in which the Company distributes its products. When the U.S. dollar strengthens against other currencies, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based sales decreases. When the U.S. dollar weakens, the U.S. dollar value of non- U.S. dollar-based sales increases. Correspondingly, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based costs increases when the U.S. dollar weakens and decreases when the U.S. dollar strengthens. Overall, the Company is a net receiver of currencies other than the U.S. dollar and, as such, benefits from a weaker dollar and is adversely affected by a stronger dollar relative to major currencies worldwide. Accordingly, changes in exchange rates, and in particular a strengthening of the U.S. dollar, may negatively affect the Company's consolidated sales and gross margins (as expressed in U.S. dollars). To mitigate the short-term impact of fluctuating currency exchange rates on the Company's non-U.S. dollar-based sales, product procurement, and operating expenses, the Company regularly hedges its non-U.S. dollar- based exposures. Specifically, the Company enters into foreign exchange forward and option contracts to hedge firmly committed transactions. Currently, hedges of firmly committed transactions do not extend beyond one year. The Company also purchases foreign exchange option contracts to hedge certain other probable, but not firmly committed transactions. Hedges of probable, but not firmly committed transactions currently do not extend beyond one year. To reduce the costs associated with these ongoing foreign exchange hedging programs, the Company also regularly sells foreign exchange option contracts and enters into certain other foreign exchange transactions. All foreign exchange forward and option contracts not accounted for as hedges, including all transactions intended to reduce the costs associated with the Company's foreign exchange hedging programs, are carried at fair value and are adjusted on each balance sheet date for changes in exchange rates. Refer to the Financial Instruments footnote on pages 26 - 28 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. While the Company is exposed with respect to fluctuations in the interest rates of many of the world's leading industrialized countries, the Company's interest income and expense is most sensitive to fluctuations in the general level of U.S. interest rates. In this regard, changes in U.S. interest rates affect the interest earned on the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments as well as interest paid on its short-term borrowings and long-term debt. To mitigate the impact of fluctuations in U.S. interest rates, the Company has entered into interest rate swap and option transactions. Certain of these swaps are intended to better match the Company's floating-rate interest income on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments with the fixed- rate interest expense on its long-term debt. The Company also enters into interest rate swap and option transactions in order to diversify a portion of the Company's exposure away from fluctuations in short-term U.S. interest rates. These instruments may extend the Company's cash investment horizon up to a maximum effective duration of three years. To ensure the adequacy and effectiveness of the Company's foreign exchange and interest rate hedge positions, as well as to monitor the risks and opportunities of the nonhedge portfolios, the Company continually monitors its foreign exchange forward and option positions, and its interest rate swap and option positions on a stand-alone basis and in conjunction with its underlying foreign currency- and interest rate-related exposures, respectively, from both an accounting and an economic perspective. However, given the effective horizons of the Company's risk management activities, there can be no assurance that the aforementioned programs will offset more than a portion of the adverse financial impact resulting from unfavorable movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. In addition, the timing of the accounting for recognition of gains and losses related to mark-to-market instruments for any given period may not coincide with the timing of gains and losses related to the underlying economic exposures, and as such, may adversely affect the Company's operating results and financial position. The Company generally does not engage in leveraged hedging. Inventory and Supply The Company's ability to satisfy demand for its products may be limited by the availability of key components. The Company believes that the availability from suppliers to the personal computer industry of microprocessors and ASICs presents the most significant potential for constraining the Company's ability to produce products. Specific microprocessors manufactured by Motorola, Inc. and IBM are currently available only from single sources, while some advanced microprocessors are currently in the early stages of ramp-up for production and thus have limited availability. The Company and other producers in the personal computer industry also compete for other semiconductor products with other industries that have experienced increased demand for such products, due to either increased consumer demand or increased use of semiconductors in their products (such as the cellular phone and automotive industries). Finally, the Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal computer industry (including certain ASICs). Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of common components instead of custom components. Such product supply constraints and corresponding increased costs could adversely affect the Company's future operating results and financial condition, including loss of market share. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage inventory levels and lead times required to obtain components in order to be more responsive to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. In addition, if anticipated unit sales growth for new and current product offerings is not realized, the Company's results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. Marketing and Distribution A number of uncertainties may affect the marketing and distribution of the Company's products. Currently, the Company's primary means of distribution is through third-party computer resellers. However, the Company is continuing its expansion into various consumer channels, such as mass-merchandise stores, consumer electronics outlets, and computer superstores. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weakens or if resellers within consumer channels decide not to continue to distribute the Company's products. Other Factors The majority of the Company's research and development activities, its corporate headquarters, and other critical business operations are located near major seismic faults. The Company's operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected in the event of a major earthquake. The Company is currently in the process of replacing its current transaction systems (which include order management, distribution, manufacturing, and finance) with a single integrated system as part of its ongoing effort to increase operational efficiency. The Company's future operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected if it is unable to implement and effectively manage the transition to this new integrated system. In April 1995, the Company announced a companywide reorganization designed to more closely align the Company's organizational structure with the Company's business strategy of placing increased focus on customer needs and expanding its presence in the home, education, and business markets. In November 1995, the Company announced a further companywide reorganization to accelerate the implementation of its market segmentation strategy. The Company's reorganization will result in the consolidation of its sales, marketing, and customer solutions organization into three geographic business units, namely, the Americas, Europe, and Japan and Asia. The Company's future operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected by its ability to effectively manage the transition to these new organizational structures. Although it is uncertain at this time, the Company may incur future restructuring charges as a result of these reorganizations. Historically, the Company has experienced increased sales in its first and fourth fiscal quarters due to holiday demand for and calendar year- end buying of some of its products. As of the date of this Annual Report, published reports relating to the U.S. economy indicated a potentially unfavorable year-end buying season. Any general economic slowdown could adversely affect demand for the Company's products, which could adversely affect the Company's results of operations and financial condition. Because of the foregoing factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company's operating results and financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. In addition, the Company's participation in a highly dynamic industry often results in significant volatility of the Company's common stock price. Liquidity and Capital Resources The Company's financial position with respect to cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, net of short-term borrowings, decreased to $491 million at September 29, 1995, from $966 million at September 30, 1994. Less cash was generated by operations in 1995 compared with 1994, primarily as a result of growth in inventory levels and an increase in accounts receivable. Inventory levels grew during 1995 in order to support anticipated demand in the first quarter of 1996 for the Company's new products. Accounts receivable also increased, reflecting the higher sales levels achieved during 1995, primarily toward the end of the fourth quarter. Cash used for operations in 1995 was partially offset by cash generated from higher sales and accounts payable levels. The increased sales levels were driven by aggressive pricing and promotional actions coupled with strong demand for the Company's PowerPC processor-based products. Accounts payable increased as a result of the growth in inventory and production levels and longer payment terms negotiated with vendors. More cash was generated by operations in 1994 compared with 1993, primarily due to a significant decrease in inventory levels, as well as increased sales levels. The significant decrease in inventory levels during 1994 resulted from improved inventory management, higher 1994 sales levels attributable to various pricing and promotional actions, and strong sales of new product inventory which had been built up in preparation for the introduction of Power Macintosh. Profit levels improved as operating expenses decreased due to the Company's implementation of restructuring actions initiated in the third quarter of 1993. Cash generated by operations in 1994 was partially offset by cash used for restructuring and an increase in accounts receivable. The increase in accounts receivable reflected an increase in sales levels achieved during 1994. The balance of accrued restructuring costs decreased as the restructuring actions initiated in the third quarter of 1993 continued to be implemented. In addition, in the third quarter of 1994, the Company lowered its estimate of the costs associated with the restructuring and recorded an adjustment that increased income by $127 million ($79 million, or $0.66 per share, after taxes). This adjustment primarily reflected the modification or cancelation of certain elements of the Company's original restructuring plan because of changing business and economic conditions that made certain elements of the restructuring plan financially less attractive than originally anticipated. Excluding short-term investments, net cash used for investments increased in 1995 compared with 1994 and 1993 levels. Net cash used for the purchase of property, plant, and equipment totaled $159 million in 1995, and was primarily made up of increases in manufacturing machinery and equipment. The Company anticipates that capital expenditures in 1996 will remain relatively consistent with 1995 expenditure levels. The Company leases the majority of its facilities and certain of its equipment under noncancelable operating leases. In 1995, rent expense under all operating leases was approximately $127 million. The Company's future lease commitments are discussed on page 34 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Short-term borrowings at September 29, 1995, were approximately $169 million higher than at September 30, 1994. These borrowings were primarily made to fund expected working capital growth in certain markets worldwide. In general, the Company's short-term borrowings reflect borrowings made under its commercial paper program and short-term loans from certain commercial banks. In particular, Apple Japan, Inc. and Apple Computer BV (Netherlands), subsidiaries of the Company, held short- term borrowings from several banks, totaling approximately $199 million and $262 million, respectively, at September 29, 1995. The Company's balance of long-term debt remained relatively constant during 1995. In 1994, $300 million aggregate principal amount of 6.5% unsecured notes were issued under an omnibus shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This shelf registration was for the registration of debt and other securities for an aggregate offering amount of $500 million. The notes were sold at 99.925% of par, for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. The notes pay interest semi-annually and mature on February 15, 2004. The 6.51% fixed rate was subsequently effectively converted to a floating rate through ten-year interest rate swaps based on the three-month U.S. dollar London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"). To mitigate the credit risk associated with these ten-year swap transactions, the Company entered into margining agreements with its third-party bank counterparties. Margining under these agreements does not start until 1997. Furthermore, these agreements would require the Company to post margin only if certain credit risk thresholds were exceeded. It is anticipated that any margin the Company may be required to post in the future would not have a material adverse effect on the Company's liquidity position. The Company expects that it will continue to incur short- and long-term borrowings from time to time to finance U.S. working capital needs and capital expenditures, because a substantial portion of the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments is held by foreign subsidiaries, generally in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries would be subject to U.S. income taxation upon repatriation to the United States; the Company's financial statements fully provide for any related tax liability on amounts that may be repatriated. Refer to the Income Taxes footnote on pages 31 - 32 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. The Company believes that its balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, together with funds generated from operations and short- and long-term borrowing capabilities, will be sufficient to meet its operating cash requirements on a short- and long-term basis. Item 8. Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. All information is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. (Tabular information: Dollars in millions, except per share amounts) Net Sales Net sales increased $1,212 million, or 15% in fiscal 1994, compared with an increase of $890 million, or 13%, in fiscal 1993. The net sales growth in 1994 over 1993 was primarily due to two factors: unit sales growth and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the average aggregate revenue per Macintosh computer unit. Total Macintosh computer unit sales increased 16% over the prior year. This growth resulted principally from strong sales of the Company's new Power Macintosh products, first introduced on March 14, 1994, and from sales of newer product offerings within the Macintosh Performa line of desktop personal computers and, to a lesser extent, within the PowerBook family of notebook personal computers. This growth was partially offset by declining unit sales in certain of the Company's more established products and older product versions. The average aggregate revenue per Macintosh unit increased slightly, primarily due to fluctuations in product mix throughout the year, despite pricing actions undertaken by the Company in response to continuing industrywide pricing pressures. Total Macintosh computer unit sales increased 32% from 1992 to 1993, reflecting strong unit sales of the Company's newer product offerings within the Macintosh Quadra, LC and Performa lines of desktop personal computers and within the PowerBook family of notebook personal computers. This growth was partially offset by declining unit sales of certain of the Company's more established products and older product versions. The average aggregate revenue per unit declined 15% in 1993 compared with 1992, primarily as a result of pricing actions undertaken by the Company in response to continuing industrywide pricing pressures. In 1994, domestic net sales increased 14% over the prior year, compared with an increase of 13% in 1993 over 1992. International net sales grew 17% from 1993 to 1994, compared with 12% growth from 1992 to 1993, primarily as a result of strong sales growth in the Pacific region, particularly in Japan. International net sales represented 46% of net sales in 1994 compared with 45% of net sales in both 1993 and 1992. Gross Margin Gross margin in 1994 continued to decline as a percentage of net sales from 1993 and 1992 levels. The gross margin percentage declined to 25.5% in 1994 from 34.2% in 1993. The downward trend in gross margin as a percentage of net sales was primarily a result of pricing and promotional actions undertaken by the Company in response to industrywide competitive pricing pressures. Gross margin was also affected somewhat adversely by changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of a stronger U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies in 1994 compared with 1993. Results from the Company's ongoing foreign currency hedging activities offset a portion of this adverse foreign currency impact on gross margin. Although the Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short term by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, the Company's operating strategy and pricing take into account changes in exchange rates over time. The decline in gross margin as a percentage of net sales from 43.7% in 1992 to 34.2% in 1993 was primarily the result of industrywide competitive pressures and associated pricing and promotional actions. Inventory valuation reserves recorded against certain products also contributed to the decline in gross margin as a percentage of net sales. The Company's results of operations were minimally affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in 1993 compared with 1992. Although the Company's gross margin percentage was 27.2% for the fourth quarter of 1994, resulting primarily from strong sales of Power Macintosh computers and the PowerBook 500 series of notebook personal computers, it is anticipated that gross margins will remain under pressure and could fall below prior years' levels worldwide due to a variety of factors, including continued industrywide pricing pressures, increased competition, and compressed product life cycles. Research and development expenditures decreased in amount during 1994 compared with 1993 and 1992. This decrease reflected the results of the Company's restructuring actions aimed at reducing costs, including product development expenditures. The increase in research and development expenditures from 1992 to 1993 reflected net additions to the Company's engineering staff and related costs. Research and development expenditures, as a percentage of net sales, decreased since 1992 as a result of revenue growth during 1993 and 1994, coupled with the Company's continuing efforts to focus its research and development project spending. The Company believes that continued investment in research and development is critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace, and is directly related to continued, timely development of new and enhanced products. Although the Company continues to manage operating expense growth relative to gross margin levels, it anticipates that research and development expenditures in 1995 will increase slightly in amount. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in amount and as a percentage of net sales in 1994 and 1993 compared with 1993 and 1992, respectively. These decreases reflect the Company's ongoing efforts to manage operating expense growth relative to gross margin levels. In 1994, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in amount and as a percentage of net sales compared with 1993, primarily because of lower employee-related and facilities costs resulting from the restructuring actions taken in the third quarter of 1993. In addition, revenue growth in 1994 contributed to the decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales. General and administrative expenses decreased in 1993 compared with 1992, primarily because of reduced employee-related expenses resulting from the restructuring actions taken in the third quarter of 1993. This decrease in general and administrative expenses was offset slightly by an increase in sales and marketing expenses as a result of increases in costs for product marketing and advertising programs related to new product introductions and efforts to increase product demand. The Company will continue to face the challenge of managing growth in selling, general and administrative expenses relative to gross margin levels, particularly in light of the Company's expectation of continued pressure on gross margins and continued competitive pressures worldwide. The Company anticipates an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in 1995 from current levels, primarily resulting from marketing and advertising expenditures. For information regarding the Company's restructuring actions, refer to pages 33-34 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Interest and other income (expense), net, decreased by $51 million, to $22 million in expense in 1994 compared with $29 million of income in 1993. Higher interest rates and larger average borrowing balances used to fund working capital needs served to significantly increase interest expense, and accounted for $28 million of the $51 million increase in expenses during 1994. Other factors contributing to this variance include interest income, which was higher in 1993 than in 1994 primarily due to a $15 million interest payment received on a non-recurring income tax refund from the Internal Revenue Service in 1993, and interest income from the Company's interest rate risk management program, which contributed $6 million in 1993, and reduced interest income by $7 million in 1994. Interest and other income (expense), net, decreased in amount in 1993 compared with 1992 because of lower interest rates, lower cash balances, expenses associated with certain financing transactions, lower gains on the sale of certain of the Company's venture capital investments, an increase in the cost of hedging certain foreign currency exposures, and an increase in interest expense due to higher commercial paper borrowing levels. This decrease was partially offset by interest earned on an income tax refund from the Internal Revenue Service and gains realized on the Company's ongoing foreign exchange risk management programs. For more information regarding the Company's strategy and accounting for financial and other derivative instruments, refer to pages 28-31 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company's effective tax rate remained unchanged in 1994, 1993 and 1992. For additional information regarding income taxes, refer to pages 35-36 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition The Company's future operating results and financial condition are dependent on the Company's ability to successfully develop, manufacture, and market technologically innovative products in order to meet dynamic customer demand patterns. Inherent in this process are a number of factors that the Company must successfully manage in order to achieve favorable future operating results and financial condition. Product Introductions and Transitions Due to the highly volatile nature of the personal computer industry, which is characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company frequently introduces new products and product enhancements. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance, the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with product transitions, the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand, and the manufacturing of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand. Accordingly, the Company cannot determine the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. On March 14, 1994, the Company introduced Power Macintosh, a new line of Macintosh computers based on a new PowerPC family of RISC microprocessors. The Company's results of operations and financial condition may be adversely affected if it is unable to successfully complete the transition of its lines of personal computers and servers from the Motorola 68000 series of microprocessors to the PowerPC microprocessor. The success of this ongoing transition will depend on the Company's ability to continue to sell products based on the Motorola 68000 series of microprocessors while gaining market acceptance of the new PowerPC processor-based products, to successfully manage inventory levels of both product lines simultaneously, and to continue to coordinate the timely development and distribution by independent software vendors of new "native" software applications specifically designed for the PowerPC processor-based products. The rate of product shipments immediately following introduction of a new product is not necessarily an indication of the anticipated future rate of shipments for that product, which depends on many factors, some of which are not under the control of the Company. These factors may include initial large purchases by a small segment of the user population that tends to purchase new technology prior to its acceptance by the majority of users ("early adopters"); purchases in satisfaction of pent- up demand by users who anticipated new technology and as a result deferred purchases of other products; and overordering by dealers who anticipate shortages due to the aforementioned factors. The preceding may also be offset by other factors, such as the deferral of purchases by many users until new technology is accepted as "proven" and for which commonly used software products are available; and the reduction of orders by dealers once they believe they can obtain sufficient supply of product previously in backlog. Backlog is often volatile after new product introductions due to the aforementioned demand factors, often increasing sharply coincident with introduction, and then reducing sharply once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient supply of product. The measurement of demand for newly introduced products is further complicated by the availability of different product configurations, which may include various types of built-in peripherals and software. Configurations may also require certain localization (such as language) for various markets and, as a result, demand in different geographic areas may be a function of the availability of third-party software in those localized versions. For example, the availability of European- language versions of software products manufactured by U.S. producers may lag behind the availability of U.S. versions by a quarter or more. This may result in lower initial demand for the Company's new products outside the United States, although localized versions of the products may be available. Competition The personal computer industry is highly competitive and continues to be characterized by consolidations in the hardware and software industries, aggressive pricing practices, and downward pressure on gross margins. The Company's results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected should the Company be unable to effectively manage the impact of industrywide pricing pressures and continue to realize the anticipated cost -reduction benefits associated with the restructuring plan initiated in the third quarter of 1993. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be affected by the Company's ability to offer customers competitive technologies while effectively managing the impact on inventory levels and the potential for customer confusion created by product proliferation. On November 7, 1994, the Company reached an agreement with International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) and Motorola, Inc. on a new hardware reference platform for the PowerPC microprocessor that is intended to deliver a much wider range of operating system and application choices for computer customers. As a result of this agreement, the Company intends to port the Macintosh operating system to the common platform. Accordingly, the Company's future operating results and financial condition may be affected by its ability to implement this and certain other collaboration agreements entered into, and to manage the associated competitive risk. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be affected by the Company's ability to increase market share in its personal computer business. Currently, the Company is the only maker of hardware that uses the Macintosh operating system, and it has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers that run the MS-DOS (registered trademark) and Microsoft Windows(TM) operating systems. Certain of the Company's personal computer products are capable of running software designed for the MS-DOS or Windows operating system, through software emulation of Intel microprocessor chips (except for one product, which does so by means of a coprocessor card). Optimal performance of the Company's products is obtained by use of software specifically designed for the Company's products, either those based on the Motorola 68000 series of microprocessors or those based on the PowerPC microprocessor. However, as a result of the collaboration agreement noted in the preceding paragraph, the Company will have the opportunity to increase its market share in the personal computer business as the Macintosh operating system becomes available on computers based on the new hardware reference platform. Decisions by customers to purchase the Company's personal computers, as opposed to MS-DOS or Windows-based systems, are often based on the availability of third-party software for particular applications. The Company believes that the availability of third-party application software for the Company's hardware products depends in part on the third- party developers' perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing such software for the Company's products versus software for the larger MS-DOS and Windows market. This analysis is based on factors such as the relative market share of the Company's products, the anticipated potential revenue that may be earned, and the costs of developing such software products. In an effort to increase overall market share, the Company plans to license the Macintosh operating system to other personal computer vendors beginning in 1995. The Company anticipates that the licensing activities will result in a variety of these vendors bringing to market personal computers that will run application software based on the Macintosh operating system. The Company also believes that licensing will offer software vendors a broader installed base on which they can develop and provide technical innovations for the Macintosh platform. At this time, the Company cannot determine the ultimate effect that licensing of the Macintosh operating system will have on its sales or results of operations. Microsoft Corporation is the developer of the MS-DOS and Windows operating systems, which are the principal competing operating systems to the Company's Macintosh operating system. Microsoft is also an important developer of application software for the Company's products. Accordingly, Microsoft's interest in producing application software for the Company's products may be influenced by Microsoft's perception of its interests as an operating system vendor. The Company's ability to produce and market competitive products is also dependent on the ability of IBM and Motorola, Inc., the suppliers of the new PowerPC RISC microprocessor for certain of the Company's products, to continue to supply to the Company microprocessors which produce superior price/performance results compared with those supplied to the Company's competitors by Intel Corporation, the developer and producer of the microprocessors used by most personal computers using the MS-DOS and Windows operating systems. IBM produces personal computers based on the Intel microprocessors as well as on the PowerPC microprocessor, and is also the developer of OS/2, a competing operating system to the Company's Macintosh operating system. Accordingly, IBM's interest in supplying the Company with improved versions of microprocessors for the Company's products may be influenced by IBM's perception of its interests as a competing manufacturer of personal computers and as a competing operating system vendor. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be affected by the Company's ability to successfully expand its new businesses and product offerings into other markets, such as the markets for on-line services and personal digital assistant (PDA) products. Global Market Risks A large portion of the Company's revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company's operations and financial results could be significantly affected by international factors, such as changes in foreign currency exchange rates or weak economic conditions in the foreign markets in which the Company distributes its products. When the U.S. dollar strengthens against other currencies, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based sales decreases. When the U.S. dollar weakens, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based sales increases. Correspondingly, the U.S. dollar value of non-U.S. dollar-based costs increases when the U.S. dollar weakens and decreases when the U.S. dollar strengthens. Overall, the Company is a net receiver of currencies other than the U.S. dollar and, as such, benefits from a weaker dollar and is adversely affected by a stronger dollar relative to major currencies worldwide. Accordingly, changes in exchange rates may negatively affect the Company's consolidated sales and gross margins (as expressed in U.S. dollars). To mitigate the short-term impact of fluctuating currency exchange rates on the Company's non-U.S. dollar-based sales, product procurement, and operating expenses, the Company regularly hedges its non-U.S. dollar-based exposures. Specifically, the Company enters into foreign exchange forward and option contracts to hedge firmly committed transactions. Currently, hedges of firmly committed transactions do not extend beyond one year. The Company also purchases foreign exchange option contracts to hedge certain other probable, but not firmly committed transactions. Hedges of probable, but not firmly committed transactions do not extend beyond one year. To reduce the costs associated with these ongoing foreign exchange hedging programs, the Company also regularly sells foreign exchange option contracts and enters into certain other foreign exchange transactions. All foreign exchange forward and option contracts not accounted for as hedges, including all transactions intended to reduce the costs associated with the Company's foreign exchange hedging programs, are carried at fair value and are adjusted each balance sheet date for changes in exchange rates. While the Company is exposed with respect to the interest rates of many of the world's leading industrialized countries, the Company's interest income and expense is most sensitive to fluctuations in the general level of U.S. interest rates. In this regard, changes in U.S. interest rates affect the interest earned on the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments as well as interest paid on its short-term borrowings and long-term debt. To mitigate the impact of fluctuations in U.S. interest rates, the Company has entered into interest rate swap and option transactions. Certain of these swaps are intended to better match the Company's floating-rate interest income on its cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments with the fixed-rate interest expense on its long-term debt. The Company also enters into interest rate swap, swaption, and option transactions in order to extend the effective duration of a portion of its cash, cash equivalent, and short-term investment portfolios. These swaps may extend the Company's cash investment horizon up to a maximum effective duration of three years. To ensure the adequacy and effectiveness of the Company's foreign exchange and interest rate hedge positions, as well as to monitor the risks and opportunities of the nonhedge portfolios, the Company continually monitors its foreign exchange forward and option positions, and its interest rate swap, swaption, and option positions on a stand-alone basis and in conjunction with its underlying foreign currency- and interest rate- related exposures, respectively, from both an accounting and an economic perspective. However, given the effective horizons of the Company's risk management activities, there can be no assurance that the aforementioned programs will offset more than a portion of the adverse financial impact resulting from unfavorable movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. As such, the Company's operating results and financial position may be adversely affected. Inventory The Company's products include certain components, such as specific microprocessors manufactured by Motorola, Inc., that are currently available only from single sources. Any availability limitations, interruptions in supplies, or price increases of these and other components could adversely affect the Company's business and financial results. The Company's future operating results and financial condition may also be adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage inventory levels and lead times required to obtain components in order to be more responsive to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. In addition, if anticipated unit sales growth for new and current product offerings is not realized, inventory valuation reserves may be necessary that would adversely affect the Company's results of operations and financial condition. Marketing and Distribution A number of uncertainties exist regarding the marketing and distribution of the Company's products. Currently, the Company's primary means of distribution is through third-party computer resellers. However, in response to changing industry practices and customer preferences, the Company is continuing its expansion into various consumer channels, such as mass-merchandise stores (for example, Sears and Wal-Mart), consumer electronics outlets, and computer superstores. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these sellers weakens or if sellers within consumer channels decide not to continue to distribute the Company's products. Other Factors The majority of the Company's research and development activities, its corporate headquarters, and other critical business operations are located near major seismic faults. The Company's operating results and financial condition could be materially adversely affected in the event of a major earthquake. The Company plans to replace its current transaction systems (which include order management, distribution, manufacturing, and finance) with a single integrated system as part of its ongoing effort to increase operational efficiency. The Company's future operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected by its ability to implement and effectively manage the transition to this new integrated system. Because of the foregoing factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company's operating results and financial condition, past financial performance should not be considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. In addition, the Company's participation in a highly dynamic industry often results in significant volatility of the Company's common stock price. The Company's financial position with respect to cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, net of short-term borrowings, increased to $966 million at September 30, 1994, from $69 million at September 24, 1993. This increase reflects a $300 million issuance of ten-year unsecured notes, the proceeds of which replaced a portion of the Company's short-term financing. The improvement in the Company's financial condition was also attributable to the Company's continued efforts to increase profit levels and to manage working capital, particularly in the area of inventory management. More cash was generated by operations in 1994 compared with 1993, primarily because of a significant decrease in inventory levels, as well as increased sales levels. The significant decrease in inventory levels during 1994 resulted from improved inventory management, higher 1994 sales levels attributable to various pricing and promotional actions, and strong sales of new product inventory which had been built up in preparation for the introduction of Power Macintosh. Profit levels improved as operating expenses decreased due to the Company's implementation of restructuring actions initiated in the third quarter of 1993. Cash generated by operations in 1994 was partially offset by cash used for restructuring and an increase in accounts receivable. The increase in accounts receivable reflected an increase in sales levels achieved during 1994. The balance of accrued restructuring costs decreased as the restructuring actions initiated in the third quarter of 1993 continued to be implemented. In addition, in the third quarter of 1994, the Company lowered its estimate of the costs associated with the restructuring and recorded an adjustment that increased income by $127 million ($79 million, or $0.66 per share, after taxes). This adjustment primarily reflected the modification or cancelation of certain elements of the Company's original restructuring plan because of changing business and economic conditions that made certain elements of the restructuring plan financially less attractive than originally anticipated. More cash was used for operations in 1993 compared with 1992, primarily because of a significant increase in inventory levels; decreases in net income, income taxes payable, and other current liabilities; and an increase in accounts receivable levels. Cash used for operations was offset slightly by increases in accrued restructuring costs and accounts payable. Inventory increased substantially during 1993 as a result of higher levels of purchased parts, work in process, and finished goods inventory in support of an expanded product line and distribution channels and anticipated higher sales volumes. The decrease in net income resulted primarily from a reduction in gross margins and the restructuring charge included in operating expenses for the third quarter. The reduction in earnings also contributed to the decrease in income taxes payable. Other current liabilities decreased as the Company continued to manage operating expense levels. The increase in accounts receivable corresponded to the higher sales levels achieved in 1993 compared with 1992, coupled with slower collections resulting from economic pressures in the reseller industry, and the Company's expansion into consumer channels, where payment terms are generally longer. These uses of cash were offset slightly by increases in accrued restructuring costs as a result of the Company's plan to restructure its operations worldwide and increases in accounts payable, reflecting the higher level of inventory purchases. Excluding short-term investments, net cash used for investments declined in 1994 compared with 1993 and 1992 levels. Net cash used for the purchase of property, plant, and equipment totaled $160 million in 1994, and was primarily made up of increases in land, buildings, machinery, and equipment. The Company anticipates that capital expenditures in 1995 will be slightly above 1994 expenditures. The Company leases the majority of its facilities and certain of its equipment under noncancelable operating leases. In 1994, rent expense under all operating leases was approximately $122 million. The Company's future lease commitments are discussed on page 38 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company's balance of long-term debt increased during 1994 due to the issuance of $300 million aggregate principal amount of 6.5% unsecured notes under an omnibus shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This shelf registration was for the registration of debt and other securities for an aggregate offering amount of $500 million. The notes were sold at 99.925% of par, for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. The notes pay interest semi- annually and mature on February 15, 2004. The 6.51% fixed-rate was subsequently effectively converted to a floating-rate through ten-year interest rate swaps based on the six-month U.S. dollar London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR). The impact of the swaps during 1994 was to reduce the 6.51% fixed-rate yield to a 5.62% yield. To mitigate the credit risk associated with these ten-year swap transactions, the Company entered into margining agreements with its third-party bank counterparties. Margining under these agreements generally does not start until 1997. Furthermore, these agreements would require the Company to post margin only if certain credit risk thresholds were exceeded. It is anticipated that any margin the Company may be required to post in the future would not have a material adverse effect on the Company's liquidity position. Short-term borrowings at September 30, 1994, were approximately $531 million lower than at September 24, 1993, as the proceeds from the issuance of $300 million in long-term debt were used to pay down the balance of short-term borrowings. The Company's short-term borrowings reflect borrowings made under its commercial paper program and short-term uncommitted bid-line arrangements with certain commercial banks. In particular, Apple Japan, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, incurred short-term yen-denominated borrowings from several Japanese banks during 1994, the balance of which aggregated the U.S. dollar equivalent of approximately $202 million at September 30, 1994. During the first quarter of 1994, the Company also entered into a 364-day $500 million committed revolving credit facility which terminated on December 8, 1994, with a syndicate of banks primarily in support of its commercial paper program. No borrowings were made under this facility. The Company expects that it will continue to incur short- and long-term borrowings from time to time to finance U.S. working capital needs and capital expenditures, because a substantial portion of the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments is held by foreign subsidiaries, generally in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries would be subject to U.S. income taxation upon repatriation to the United States; the Company's financial statements fully provide for any related tax liability on amounts that may be repatriated. Refer to the Income Taxes footnote on pages 35-36 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. The Company believes that its balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, together with funds generated from operations and short- and long-term borrowing capabilities, will be sufficient to meet its operating cash requirements on a short- and long-term basis. Item 8.